CLOSED LOAN DATA 
The  Closed Loan Data tab of the MCR. While the previous screen tracked the pipeline (the 
flow of apps), this one is a post-closing of everything that was actually funded. 
This is essentially your Categorization Engine. Regulators want to see exactly what "flavors" of 
loans you are closing to ensure you aren't being predatory or discriminatory. 
1. Forward Mortgages – Loan Type 
A "Forward" mortgage is a standard loan where the borrower pays the bank back over time. 
This section categorizes the loan by who is "insuring" it if the borrower defaults. 
● AC100 (Conventional): Standard private loans. Usually backed by Fannie Mae or 
Freddie Mac government entities. Data Type: Enum default. 
● AC110 (FHA-Insured): Backed by the Federal Housing Administration. Usually for lower 
credit scores. 
● AC120 (VA Guaranteed): Backed by Veterans Affairs. Exclusively for military members. 
● AC130 (FSA/RHS-Guaranteed): USDA Rural Development loans. For properties in 
eligible rural areas. 
● AC190 (Total): Validation Check. software must ensure AC100 + AC110 + AC120 + 
AC130 = AC190. 
2. Property Type 
This tracks the physical collateral securing the database record. 
● AC200 (One to Four Family Dwelling): Standard houses, townhomes, condos, or 
duplexes/triplexes. This is 99% of normal loan volume. 
● AC210 (Manufactured Housing): Mobile homes or prefabricated homes. Regulators 
track these separately because they have different risk profiles and consumer protection 
laws. 
● AC290 (Total): Validation Check. Must equal AC190. 
3. Purpose of Loan or Application 
The "Why" behind the transaction. 
● AC300 (Home Purchase): The borrower is buying a new property. 
● AC310 (Home Improvement): The borrower is taking out money specifically tied to 
renovating their current home. 
● AC320 (Refinancing): Replacing an existing mortgage with a new one (to get a lower 
rate or pull out cash). 
● AC390 (Total): Validation Check. Must equal AC190 and AC290. 
4. HOEPA 
The Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act. 
● AC400 (HOEPA): The "High-Cost Loan" flag. If your automated compliance engine flags 
a loan's APR or fees as exceeding federal limits, it lands here. Developer Note: As a 
rule of thumb, companies try to keep this at 0. If numbers appear here, the company is 
dealing in high-risk, heavily regulated lending. 
5. Lien Status 
Where the lender stands in line to get paid if the house goes into foreclosure. 
● AC500 (First Lien): The primary mortgage. They get paid first. 
● AC510 (Subordinate Lien): A "Second Mortgage" or HELOC. They only get paid if 
there is money leftover after the First Lien is paid. 
● AC520 (Not Secured by a Lien): Very rare in this context; a personal loan not actually 
tied to the house. 
● AC590 (Total): Validation Check. Must equal all previous totals. 
6. Fee Information 
This is the gross revenue snapshot pulling directly from the first "Revenue & Compensation" UI 
we discussed. 
● AC600 (Broker Fees Collected): Total dollars earned on files in the "Brokered" column 
(e.g., the $150,000 you saw earlier). 
● AC610 (Lender Fees Collected): Total dollars earned from underwriting/processing 
fees on files in the "Non-Delegated" column. 
7. Reverse Mortgages 
A reverse mortgage is where the bank pays the borrower (usually a senior citizen) out of their 
home's equity. 
● AC700 (HECM-Standard): The standard government-insured reverse mortgage (Home 
Equity Conversion Mortgage). 
● AC710 (HECM-Saver): An older, obsolete version of the HECM with lower upfront fees 
but less available cash. Dev Note: This will almost always be zero for new records. 
● AC720 (Proprietary/Other): Private reverse mortgages not insured by the government 
(usually for multi-million dollar "jumbo" homes). 
● AC790 (Total): The sum of reverse mortgages. 
8. QM and Non-QM 
The "Safe Harbor" classification. This tracks how strictly the underwriter checked the borrower's 
ability to repay. 
● AC920 (Qualified Mortgage - QM): Loans that follow strict federal guidelines 
(debt-to-income limits, no risky features). It gives the lender legal protection if the 
borrower defaults. 
● AC930 (Non-Qualified Mortgage): Loans that fall outside the standard rules (e.g., using 
bank deposit statements instead of W-2s to prove income). 
● AC940 (Not Subject to QM): Loans exempt from the rule entirely (like investment 
properties/rental homes, because they are considered business loans, not consumer 
loans). 
● AC990 (Total Closed Loans): The Master Checksum. This sum must match AC190, 
AC290, AC390, and AC590. 
To understand why this acts as the "Master Checksum," you have to think about how this 
NMLS report is generated. You are not looking at five different datasets; you are looking 
at the exact same dataset sliced in five different ways. 
Here is the logic breakdown of why AC990 is the anchor for the entire page: 
1. The "Single Source of Truth" Analogy 
Imagine you have an array of loan objects in your database representing everything that 
funded this quarter. In your screenshot, that array contains exactly 2 loans (1 Brokered, 
1 Non-Delegated) totaling $720,000. 
Every section on this page is just a GROUP BY query run against that exact same array. 
● AC190 (Total Loan Type): GROUP BY loan_type (Conventional vs. FHA) 
● AC290 (Total Property Type): GROUP BY property_type (House vs. Mobile 
Home) 
● AC390 (Total Purpose): GROUP BY loan_purpose (Purchase vs. Refi) 
● AC590 (Total Lien Status): GROUP BY lien_position (1st vs. 2nd) 
● AC990 (Total Closed Loans): GROUP BY qm_status (QM vs. Non-QM) 
2. The Checksum Logic (Why it must match) 
Because you are querying the same 2 loans every time, the grand total at the bottom of 
each of these sections must be identical. 
If the totals do not match, it proves to the regulators that your database has "dirty data." 
How the NMLS Validation Engine sees it: If AC190 (Loan Type) says you closed 
$360,000, but AC290 (Property Type) says you only closed $300,000, it means one of 
your loan records has a NULL or missing property type. The NMLS system will instantly 
reject the entire quarterly upload because the math doesn't balance. 
Developer Pseudo-code for your Validation API: 
JavaScript 
const totalAmount = AC990.amount; 
if ( 
AC190.amount !== totalAmount || 
AC290.amount !== totalAmount || 
AC390.amount !== totalAmount || 
AC590.amount !== totalAmount 
) { 
throw new Error("MCR Validation Failed: Dimensional totals do not match the 
Master Checksum (AC990). Check for NULL values in loan categories."); 
} 
3. The "Orphaned Record" Prevention 
When you are building the UI for the loan origination system (LOS), this checksum 
dictates your required fields. 
To prevent AC990 from failing at the end of the quarter, your software cannot allow a 
user to change a file's status to "Funded" unless loan_type, property_type, 
purpose, lien_position, and qm_status are all completely filled out. If even one 
enum is left blank, that loan becomes an "orphaned record" in that specific category, and 
the MCR export will break. 
Summary for your Architecture 
● AC990 is your base SELECT SUM(loan_amount) for the quarter. 
● The other totals (AC190, AC290, etc.) are validation checks ensuring that every 
single loan was perfectly categorized with no missing metadata. 
● AC1000 (Loans Made and Assigned but Required to Repurchase): The "Defect" 
bucket. If you sold a loan to an investor but it had fraud or a massive error, the investor 
forces you to buy it back. This is a critical risk metric. 
9. Serviced Loans 
Tracking the long-term billing rights for the loans you closed in the "Non-Delegated" column. 
● AC1200 (Servicing Retained): You kept the rights to send the monthly bill and collect 
the interest. 
● AC1210 (Servicing Released): You sold the loan and the billing rights to a massive 
aggregator immediately after closing. 
● AC1290 (Total): The total here usually matches the Non-Delegated column totals above. 
● Developer Validation Rule: IF (Loan.FundingMethod == "Non-Delegated") { 
REQUIRE Loan.ServicingDisposition IN ['Retained', 'Released']; } 
● ASSERT SUM(AC1200.Count + AC1210.Count) == 
AC990.NonDelegated.Count 
A Note on Database Architecture 
Your backend should run a scheduled script at the end of the quarter that queries the 
Loan_Files table, checks the Status == 'Funded', aggregates the respective enums 
(Loan Type, Purpose, etc.), and populates this grid automatically. If a user manually alters one 
number, it will break the entire checksum validation when uploaded to the NMLS portal. 