NMLS Mortgage Call Report
Field Definitions & Instructions
Form Version 6 
This document provides field definitions, instructions and data formatting requirements for completing the 
NMLS Mortgage Call Report (MCR).  The document contains four sections:
1. Glossary of General Terms - definitions for terminology used throughout the rest of the document
2. Residential Mortgage Loan Activity (RMLA) - field definitions for RMLA Sections I, II and III of the MCR
3. Supplemental State-Specific Form (SSSF) - field definitions for state-specific fields not included in the 
RMLA
4. Financial Condition (FC) - field definitions for the Financial Condition component of the MCR
NOTES:- Fields described as "CALCULATED" are calculated automatically by NMLS and do not require any input.- Field instructions that are in bold italics indicate a rule that will be validated by the NMLS Completeness 
Check.
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
Absolute Value Also called numerical value. The magnitude of a quantity, without regard for it's sign; 
the distance of a quantity from zero. For example, the absolute value of -3 is 3.
Amount The total loan amount of applications received, closed loans 
brokered/retailed/wholesaled.
Application An application is an oral or written request for an extension of credit encumbering a 1
4 unit residential property.  Exclude any commercial/business/investment purpose 
encumbrances from reporting.  The application date used is either (1.)The date on the 
initial 1003 with the borrower’s signature, or; (2) The date of an oral request for 
extension of credit, with deference to the initial 1003. Examples of requests that are 
considered an application for the NMLS MCR include, but are not limited to, purchase 
of owner occupied 1-4 unit residential properties including 2nd homes and vacation 
homes; construction of 1-4 unit residential properties (as described above) made 
directly to the consumer; non-commercial liens on residential properties (Lines of 
Credit should be reported at maximum approved credit line); reverse mortgages – 
regardless of purpose; and refinance loans on all of the above.
Broker Fee Any fee collected in conjunction with brokering a loan not including pass through fees 
(e.g. appraisal, credit report, flood cert., etc.)
Closed Closed refers to loans that have funded and have legally binding agreements 
establishing a residential mortgage loan.
Closed Retail Closed retail refers to loans that have legally binding agreements establishing a 
residential mortgage loan and have been originated/funded by the institution who took 
the application.
Closed Wholesale Closed wholesale refers to loans that have legally binding agreements establishing a 
residential mortgage loan with an application taken by one party but funded by 
another.
Count The total number of applications or closed loans.
Directly Received from Borrower Applications that your institution has directly received from the borrower.
Dwelling Dwelling means a residential structure that contains one to four units, whether or not 
that structure is attached to real property. The term includes an individual 
condominium unit, cooperative unit, mobile home, trailer, and houseboat if used as a 
residence.
FC or Financial Condition A component of the Mortgage Call Report containing financial information at the 
company level.
First Lien A mortgage loan having priority over all other liens or claims on a property in the 
event of default.
Forward Mortgage A loan secured by a lien on residential real estate in which the homeowner is required 
to make regular payments on the loan.
FV (Fair Value Option) The Fair Value Option per the provisions in the Financial Accounting Standards 
Number 159.
HAMP Home Affordable Modification Program
HFI Held for Investment
HFS Held for Sale
Lender Fee Any fee collected in conjunction with closing and/or funding a retail or wholesale loan 
not including pass through fees (e.g. appraisal, credit report, flood cert., etc.)
Loan or Residential Mortgage Loan Any loan primarily for personal, family, or household use that is secured by a 
mortgage, deed of trust, or other equivalent consensual security interest on a dwelling 
as defined in section 103(v) of the Truth in Lending Act) or residential real estate 
upon which is constructed or intended to be constructed a dwelling (as so defined).
LOCOM Lower of Cost or Market
Loan-to-Value Ratio (LTV) A lending risk assessment ratio that financial institutions and others lenders examine 
before approving a mortgage.  For MCR purposes report the current LTV based upon 
the most recent appraised value.  LTV= (Mortgage Loan Amount or UPB/ Most recent 
appraised value) 
Originated A closed/funded loan
Pass-through Fee Fees that are not retained by your company (e.g. appraisal, credit report, flood cert., 
etc.)
Glossary of General Terms
Page 2 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
Pool Number In the mortgage industry a number can be assigned to a group or “pool” of loans that 
are being serviced and/or sold in the secondary market. In most cases these pools 
are grouped by investor type. Sometimes a number may not be given or assigned; in 
that case an internal number should be issued by the reporting entity.  If you assigned 
a pool number, filers should use their own in-house pool numbers and retain proper 
work papers to provide the examiners during an examination. 
Pre-Approval A Pre-Approval is an application for a residential real estate mortgage loan where a 
binding credit decision is expected and will be communicated in advance of identifying 
a specific property.
Qualified Mortgage (QM) Under Regulation Z (12 CFR 1026), a loan that meets the product feature 
requirements can be a QM under any of three main categories: (1) the general 
definition - Any loan that meets the product feature requirements with a debt-to
income ratio of 43% or less is a QM; (2) the “GSE/agency--eligible” provision - Any 
loan that meets the product feature requirements and is eligible for purchase, 
guarantee, or insurance by a GSE, FHA, VA, or USDA is QM regardless of the debt to
income ratio; (3) the small creditor provision - If you have less than $2B in assets and 
originate 500 or fewer first mortgages per year, loans you make and hold in portfolio 
are QMs as long as you have considered and verified a borrower’s debt-to-income 
ratio, though no specific DTI limit applies.
Received from 3rd Party Application that your institution has received from a broker or lender.
Repurchase Loans that you were required to buy back from an investor or securitizer during the 
period.
Residential First Mortgages (1-4 Unit Residential) A Residential First Mortgage (1-4 Unit Residential) is a first position lien on a 1-4 unit 
residential dwelling.  This includes real estate and non-real estate secured property.  
Non-real estate secured property includes, but is not limited to, those dwellings 
considered chattel such as trailers and manufactured homes, boats or any other 
medium used as a dwelling.
RMLA or Residential Mortgage Loan Activity A component of the Mortgage Call Report containing application, closed loan, 
mortgage loan originator, lines of credit, repurchase, origination, servicing and/or note 
information reported by state.
Reverse Mortgage A loan secured by a lien on residential real estate in which the homeowner is not 
required to make payments on the loan until a specific event occurs.
REO Real Estate Owned
SRP Service Release Premium
Subordinate Lien A mortgage loan that is junior or second to first lien loans including but not limited to 
home equity, second mortgage, down payment or closing assistance programs.
UPB Unpaid Principal Balance
YSP Yield Spread Premium
NOTES:
Fields described as "CALCULATED" are calculated automatically by NMLS and do not require any input.
Field instructions that are in bold italics indicate a rule that will be validated by the NMLS Completeness Check.
Page 3 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
Residential Mortgage Loan Activity (Company-Level)
RMLA COMPANY-LEVEL INFORMATION
LINES OF CREDIT AT PERIOD END
LOC Warehouse Lines of Credit Enter your Warehouse Line providers, the limit on each line of credit for each provider 
and the amount you have available on each line of credit at the end of the period. 
This must reflect all warehouse line providers your company has a relationship with. 
LOANS SERVICED - NATIONWIDE TOTALS
LS010 Wholly Owned Loans Serviced Enter the UPB and Loan Count for loans that you are servicing and for which you 
retain all ownership rights.  Report your company's nationwide totals of all loans 
serviced regardless of whether or not your company is licensed in a particular 
state or if your company is required to submit a state-specific RMLA for a 
particular state.
LS020 Loans Serviced Under MSRs Enter the UPB and Loan Count for loans that you are servicing and for which you own 
only the Mortgage Servicing Rights.   Report your company's nationwide totals of all 
loans serviced regardless of whether or not your company is licensed in a particular 
state or if your company is required to submit a state-specific RMLA for a particular 
state.
LS030 Subservicing for Others Enter the UPB and Loan Count for loans that you are subservicing on behalf of 
others.   Report your company's nationwide totals of all loans serviced regardless of 
whether or not your company is licensed in a particular state or if your company is 
required to submit a state-specific RMLA for a particular state.
LS040 Subservicing by Others Enter the UPB and Loan Count for loans that are Wholly Owned or for which you own 
the Mortgage Servicing Rights and have contracted with a third-party to service on 
your behalf.   Report your company's nationwide totals of all loans serviced regardless 
of whether or not your company is licensed in a particular state or if your company is 
required to submit a state-specific RMLA for a particular state.
LS090 Total Servicing Activity Equals the sum of rows LS010 to LS040 for the corresponding column.
SERVICING TRANSFERS DURING THE QUARTER
LS100 Loan Servicing Transferred In During the Period A mortgage servicer, among other things, collects and processes loan payments on 
behalf of the owner of the mortgage note. Servicing transfers are common and may 
occur in several ways. The mortgage owner may sell the rights to service the loan, 
called the Mortgage Servicing Rights (MSR), separately from the note ownership. The 
owner of the loan or MSR may, rather than servicing the loan itself, hire a vendor – 
typically called a subservicer – to take on the servicing duties. MSR owners frequently 
sell MSR outright as an asset. Servicing transfers may also occur through whole loan 
servicing transfers or whole loan portfolio transfers, rather than through sales of MSR. 
For MCR purposes, we are using the term “transfer” broadly to cover transfers of 
servicing rights as well as transfers of servicing responsibilities through subservicing 
or whole loan servicing arrangements.  For LS100, report this information as it relates 
to transfers into the entity.
Report all warehouse line providers for your company.
Data Format:
Name of Provider - Text (150 characters max)
Credit Limit - Positive dollar amount to the nearest dollar
Remaining Credit Available - Dollar amount to the nearest dollar
Page 4 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
LS110 Loan Servicing Transferred Out During the Period A mortgage servicer, among other things, collects and processes loan payments on 
behalf of the owner of the mortgage note. Servicing transfers are common and may 
occur in several ways. The mortgage owner may sell the rights to service the loan, 
called the Mortgage Servicing Rights (MSR), separately from the note ownership. The 
owner of the loan or MSR may, rather than servicing the loan itself, hire a vendor – 
typically called a subservicer – to take on the servicing duties. MSR owners frequently 
sell MSR outright as an asset. Servicing transfers may also occur through whole loan 
servicing transfers or whole loan portfolio transfers, rather than through sales of MSR. 
For MCR purposes, we are using the term “transfer” broadly to cover transfers of 
servicing rights as well as transfers of servicing responsibilities through subservicing 
or whole loan servicing arrangements.  For LS110, report this information as it relates 
to transfers from the entity.
LS190 Total Loans Transferred In and Out During the 
Period 
Equals the sum of rows LS100 to LS110 for the corresponding column.
NATIONWIDE PAYMENT STATUS OF LOANS SERVICED AS OF END DATE (ALL LOANS)
LS200 Less than 30 Days Delinquent (includes loans that 
are not delinquent)
Enter the UPB and Count of Mortgage Loans you serviced during the period that are 
current.
LS210 30 to 59 Days Delinquent Enter the UPB and Count of Mortgage Loans you serviced during the period that are 
30 to 59 days delinquent.
LS220 60 to 89 Days Delinquent Enter the UPB and Count of Mortgage Loans you serviced during the period that are 
60 to 89 days delinquent.
LS230 90 or more Days Delinquent Enter the UPB and Count of Mortgage Loans you serviced during the period that are 
90 or more days delinquent.
LS290 Total Loans Serviced Equals the sum of rows LS200 to LS230 for the corresponding column.
NOTE Provide any necessary explanations for any company level information requiring 
clarification submitted as part of this report. State specific explanations should be 
added to the state RMLA component. This field is a permanent part of your Mortgage 
Call Report filing. 
Page 5 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
RMLA SECTION I
APPLICATION DATA
APPLICATION PIPELINE
AC010 Applications In Process at the Beginning of the 
Period
Starting number of applications that were in process at the end of the previous period. 
Note this includes loans which are approved but not yet closed. 
AC020 Applications Received The applications you received during the period (received from third party or directly 
from borrower).
AC030 Applications Approved but not Accepted The applications approved but the applicant, broker, or correspondent failed to 
respond to notification of approval or commitment letter within the specified time.
AC040 Applications Denied The applications denied during the period.
AC050 Applications Withdrawn The applications expressly withdrawn by the applicant before a credit decision is 
made. Include all applications withdrawn during this period regardless of the period 
the application was received.
AC060 File Closed for Incompleteness The applications where you send a written notice of incompleteness under section 
1002.9(c)(2) of Regulation B (Equal Credit Opportunity) and the applicant did not 
respond to your request for additional information within the period of time specified in 
your notice.
AC065 Net Changes in Application Amount (decreases 
should be reflected as negative)
Enter the net changes in application dollar amounts during the quarter. An application 
amount may change from the amount reported in the initial application. If the 
aggregate number of the changes is negative, input a negative number in this field.    
AC063 Net Application Changes (decreases should be 
reflected as negative)
Use this line to add or remove count and amount in the application data. If the 
aggregate amount is negative, input a negative number in this field.  Retain detailed 
support information for use during an examination.                                                                                      
Note: This line should include $ and Count.                            
Required: Explanation in Commentary Section.
AC066 Total Application Pipeline Equals the sum of rows AC010 to AC065 in the above column. This sum should equal 
AC090.  (AC010+AC020)-(AC030+AC040+AC050+AC060)+AC065+AC063
APPLICATION PIPELINE RESULTS
AC070 Loans Closed and Funded The applications that were received in any period but originated in this period.   This 
field should equal AC990 and the total in the Mortgage Loan Originator Data section.
AC080 Applications in Process at the End of the Period Ending number of applications that were in process at the end of this period (open 
pipeline)
AC090 Total Application Pipeline Results Equals the sum of rows AC070 to AC080 in the above column.  This sum should 
equal AC066.
CLOSED LOAN DATA
AC100 Conventional Any loan other than FHA, VA, FSA or RHS loans
AC110 FHA-Insured Federal Housing Administration Insured
AC120 VA-guaranteed Veterans Administration Guaranteed
Residential Mortgage Loan Activity (State-Specific)
Enter the type of action taken on applications during the period. Applications may not necessarily be closed and funded. 
Data Format:
Amount ($ US Dollars) - Positive dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals. 
Count (#) - Positive whole number. Do not enter any symbols.
Enter information for applications received in any period but which closed during this period and were reported in AC070. A closed loan for this section has 
(1) executed legally binding agreements establishing a residential mortgage loan and (2) is funded but may not necessarily be funded by your company. All 
forward mortgage closed loans should be captured in AC100-AC520 and reported by brokered, closed-retail, closed-wholesale as well as by type, purpose, 
HOEPA and lien status. All reverse mortgages should be captured in AC700-800. All fees collected and retained by your company should be reported for 
forward mortgages in AC 600-610 and for reverse mortgages in AC 620-630.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
To help determine which column your company should enter closed loans, consider the following:
BROKERED: means a closed loan for which you have taken the application but did not fund the loan
CLOSED-RETAIL: means a closed loan for which you have taken the application and funded the loan
CLOSED-WHOLESALE: means a closed loan for which you have not taken the application but did fund the loan
Data Format:
Amount ($ US Dollars) - Positive dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals. 
Count (#) - Positive whole number. Do not enter any symbols. 
Page 6 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
AC130 FSA/RHS-guaranteed Farm Service Agency or Rural Housing Service Guaranteed
AC190 Total Loan Type - Forward Mortgages CALCULATED: The sum of AC100 to AC130 for the relevant column.
AC200 One to Four Family Dwelling Property type other than manufactured housing of 1 to 4 family dwelling
AC210 Manufactured housing Manufactured housing property type
AC290 Total Property Type CALCULATED: The sum of AC200 to AC210 for the relevant column.
AC300 Home Purchase Any loan secured by and made for the purpose of purchasing a dwelling
AC310 Home Improvement Any dwelling-secured loan to be used, at least in part, for repairing, rehabilitating, 
remodeling, or improving a dwelling (or the real property on which the dwelling is 
located) OR any loan not secured by a lien on a dwelling to be used, at least in part, 
for one or more of those purposes that is classified as a home improvement loan by 
the institution
AC320 Refinancing Any dwelling-secured loan that replaces and satisfies another dwelling-secured loan 
to the same borrower
AC390 Total Purpose of Loan or Application CALCULATED: The sum of AC300 to AC320 for the relevant column.
AC400 HOEPA For a loan that you originated or purchased that is subject to the Home Ownership 
and Equity Protection Act of 1994 (HOEPA), as implemented in Regulation Z (12 CFR 
1026.32), because the APR or the points and fees on the loan exceed the HOEPA 
triggers. Include those loans you closed fitting this description as the originator in the 
"closed-retail" column and those that someone else originated but you were the 
wholesaler in the "closed-wholesale" column.
AC500 First Lien Secured by a first lien on real property
AC510 Subordinate Lien Secured by a subordinate lien on real property. The amount listed should be the full 
exposure amount the institution may have on the loan. 
AC520 Not Secured by a Lien Not secured by a lien on real property.  Loans fitting this definition include dwellings 
not attached to real property such as manufactured housing, house boats, or trailers 
that are used as dwellings. 
AC590 Total Lien Status CALCULATED: The sum of AC500 to AC520 for the relevant column.
AC600 Broker Fees Collected-Forward Mortgages The gross total amount of broker fees, examples include but are not limited to YSP, 
application fee, doc prep fee, administrative fee, you collected on forward mortgages 
during the period. Do not include pass through fees.  
AC610 Lender Fees Collected-Forward Mortgages The gross total amount of lender fees, examples include but are not limited to 
application fee, doc prep fee, administrative fee, you collected on forward mortgages 
during the period. Do not include pass through fees.  
AC700 HECM-Standard Reverse Mortgage Loans falling under the Home Equity Conversion Mortgage 
Standard category. The amount listed should be the full exposure amount the 
institution may have on the loan.
AC710 HECM-Saver Reverse Mortgage Loans falling under the Home Equity Conversion Mortgage Saver 
category. The amount listed should be the full exposure amount the institution may 
have on the loan.
AC720 Proprietary/Other Reverse Mortgage Loans falling under any category other than HECM Standard or 
Saver. The amount listed should be the full exposure amount the institution may have 
on the loan.
AC790 Total Loan Type - Reverse Mortgages CALCULATED: The sum of AC700 to AC720 for the relevant column.
AC800 Home Purchase For reverse mortgages reported in AC700, AC710 and AC720 whose purpose was a 
home purchase, report the amount and count of these loans in AC800. 
AC810 Other For reverse mortgages reported in AC700, AC710 and AC720 whose purpose was 
not a home purchase as reported in AC800, report the amount and count of these 
loans in AC810.
AC890 Total Purpose of Reverse Mortgage CALCULATED: The sum of AC800 to AC810 for the relevant column.
AC620 Broker Fees Collected-Reverse Mortgages The gross total amount of broker fees, examples include but are not limited to YSP, 
application fee, doc prep fee, administrative fee, you collected on reverse mortgages 
during the period. Do not include pass through fees.  
AC630 Lender Fees Collected-Reverse Mortgages The gross total amount of lender fees, examples include but are not limited to 
application fee, doc prep fee, administrative fee, you collected on reverse mortgages 
during the period. Do not include pass through fees.  
AC900 Total Loans Brokered by your Company Enter the total number of loans you brokered in the period (a mortgage loan 
application taken by your company in any period and closed in this period)
AC910 Total Loans Funded by your Company Enter the total number of loans you funded in the period
AC920 Qualified Mortgage (QM) Loans Closed and Funded during this period that are QM Loans.  Under Regulation Z 
(12 CFR 1026), a loan that meets the product feature
requirements can be a QM under any of three main categories: (1) the general 
definition; (2) the “GSE/agency-eligible” provision; (3) the small creditor provision.
Page 7 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
AC930 Non-Qualified Mortgage Loans Closed and Funded during this period that are Non-QM Loans.  Include all 
loans not reported in AC920.  Under Regulation Z (12 CFR 1026), a loan that meets 
the product feature
requirements can be a QM under any of three main categories: (1) the general 
definition; (2) the “GSE/agency-eligible” provision; (3) the small creditor provision. 
AC940 Not Subject to QM Loans Closed and Funded during this period that are not subject to QM standards.
AC990 Total Closed Loans Equals the sum of rows AC920 to AC940 in the above column.  This sum should 
equal AC070 and the total in the Mortgage Loan Originator Data section.
AC1000 Loans Made and Assigned but Required to 
Repurchase in Period
If you were required to repurchase any loans during the period regardless of when 
that loan was made and assigned, enter the information here
REVENUE DATA
Enter revenue information your company received in this state during the reporting period. 
AC1100 Gross Revenue from Mortgage Origination 
Operations
All revenue from mortgage origination operations received by your company on 
mortgage loans in this state during the reporting period before any expenses are 
deducted.
SERVICING DISPOSITION ON CLOSED LOANS
AC1200 Closed Loans with Servicing Retained During the 
Quarter
Enter the Amount and Count of closed and funded loans during the quarter on which 
you intend to retain the Mortgage Servicing Rights, based on your intentions at the 
time the loan is made.  Brokered loans do not belong in this section.  
Note: Brokers who do not fund loans do not need to complete this field.
AC1210 Closed Loans with Servicing Released During the 
Quarter
Enter the Amount and Count of closed and funded loans during the quarter on which 
you intend to sell the Mortgage Servicing Rights, based on your intentions at the time 
the loan is made.  Brokered loans do not belong in this section.  
Note: Brokers who do not fund loans do not need to complete this field.
AC1290 Servicing Disposition Total Equals the sum of rows AC1200 to AC1210 in the above column.  This sum should 
equal the sum of AC990 for the retail and wholesale columns.  Brokered loans do not 
belong in this section.  
MORTGAGE LOAN ORIGINATOR DATA
ACMLO1 Employee Name, MLO NMLS ID, Amount ($) and 
Count (#) 
Provide MLO NMLS ID, Amount ($) and Count (#) of loans originated by each of your 
state licensed MLOs. NMLS will retrieve the legal name associated to the NMLS ID 
provided.
EXPLANATORY NOTES-FREE TEXT
ACNOTE Provide any necessary state specific RMLA explanations for any information requiring 
clarification submitted as part of this component. This field is a permanent part of your 
Mortgage Call Report filing. 
RMLA SECTION II 
Enter closed loan information for MLOs you employed during the reporting period who had originations. MLO with no closed loans during the period do not 
need to be listed. List the MLOs originating in this state. 
Data Format:
MLO NMLS ID - Positive whole number
Amount ($) - Positive dollar amount to the nearest dollar
Count (#) - Positive whole number
Residential First Mortgages (1-4 Unit Residential ONLY)
Data Format:
UPB ($) – Positive dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals. 
Loan Count (#) – Positive whole number. Do not enter any symbols. 
Average FICO Score – Positive whole number 
Weighted Average – Number to the nearest hundredth (two-decimal figure) 
Ratio – Number to the nearest hundredth (two-decimal figure) 
Average Days – Positive whole number
Page 8 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
I010 Government (FHA/VA/RHS) Fixed The dollar amount and number of residential loans that are guaranteed or insured by 
the government (FHA, VA, or RHS, including bond or state assisted loans) in which 
the mortgage rate remains fixed throughout the life of the loan, for example, 15-year, 
20-year, and 30 year loans.
I020 Government (FHA/VA/RHS) ARM The dollar amount and number of residential loans that are guaranteed or insured by 
the government (FHA, VA, or RHS, including bond or state assisted loans) and in 
which the mortgage rate adjusts according to a specified price index periodically and 
as agreed to at the inception of the loan. FHA Home Equity Conversion Mortgages 
(reverse mortgages) are reported below in item I130—Reverse Mortgages.
I030 Conventional Conforming Fixed The dollar amount and number of 1-to-4 unit residential first mortgage loans that are 
eligible for sale to Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac and in which the mortgage rate remains 
fixed throughout the life of the loan. This should not include FHA and VA loans 
because they are reported separately on this form.
I040 Conventional Conforming ARM The dollar amount and number of 1-to-4 unit residential first mortgage loans that are 
eligible for sale to Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac and in which the mortgage rate adjusts 
according to a specified price index periodically and as agreed to at the inception of 
the loan. This should not include FHA and VA loans because they are reported 
separately on this form.
I050 Conventional Non-Conforming (Jumbo) Fixed The dollar amount and number of 1-to-4 unit residential first mortgage loans that are 
not Alt-A or non-prime credit grade (see definition in I070 below), whose balances 
exceed Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac loan limits, and in which the mortgage rate remains 
fixed throughout the life of the loan.
I060 Conventional Non-Conforming (Jumbo) ARM The dollar amount and number of 1-to-4 unit residential first mortgage loans that are 
not Alt-A or non-prime credit grade (see definition in I070 below), whose balances 
exceed Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac loan limits, and in which the mortgage rate adjusts 
according to a specified price index periodically and as agreed to at the inception of 
the loan.
I070 Other Fixed The dollar amount and number of all other 1-to-4 unit residential first mortgage loans 
not reported above, including Alt-A and non-prime credit grade loans and in which the 
mortgage rate remains fixed throughout the life of the loan. Non-prime loans are 
considered those to lower credit quality borrowers (generally <620 FICO) who do not 
qualify for prime or Alt-A loans. They often contain other risky features such as high 
loan to value (LTV) ratios and limited documentation.
I080 Other ARM The dollar amount and number of all other 1-to-4 unit residential first mortgage loans 
not reported above, including Alt-A and non-prime credit grade loans (see definition in 
I070 above) and in which the mortgage rate adjusts according to a specified price 
index periodically and as agreed to at the inception of the loan.
I100 Total Residential First Mortgages CALCULATED: The sum of I010 to I080 for the relevant column.
I110 Closed-End Second Mortgages The dollar amount and number of mortgages that have rights subordinate to a first 
mortgage. Report both fixed rate and adjustable rate second mortgages here. Do not 
include loans under lines of credit that permit borrowers the ability to obtain cash 
advances based on approved line of credit.
I120 HELOCs This line should include home equity loans that permit borrowers the ability to obtain 
cash advances based on an approved credit limit. Report the maximum credit 
amount.
I130 Reverse Mortgages The dollar amount and number of home equity loans for homeowners 62 years of age 
or older, advanced as a lump sum at closing, regular payments over a time period, or 
as a line of credit that do not require any repayment as long as the home remains the 
principal residence of the borrower. This should include FHA Home Equity 
Conversion Mortgages (HECM).
I140 Construction Loans, 1-4 Unit Residential The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential construction-to permanent 
loans to home buyers.
I170 Other Residential Mortgage Loans The dollar amount and number of all other mortgages not reported above.
I180 Total Other Mortgage Loans CALCULATED: The sum of I110 to I170 for the relevant column.
I200 Total Mortgage Loans Originated CALCULATED: The total of all mortgage loans originated in the reporting period. The 
sum of I100 and I180 for the relevant column. Must equal the retail and wholesale 
columns of AC190 and AC790.
Other Mortgages 
Page 9 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
Residential First Mortgages (1-4 Unit Residential ONLY) 
I210 Retail The dollar amount and number of mortgage loans in I100—Total—that were 
originated through your Retail channel. Retail mortgage loans are considered those 
originated through loan officers (who are employees of your institution) within 
standard or "net" branch network systems. Direct face-to-face contact with the 
mortgagor is characteristic of this channel. Also include loans originated through 
direct sales such as outbound or inbound internet or email, telemarketing, or direct 
mail for purchase or refinance purposes.
I220 Table Funded The dollar amount and number of loans in I100—Total—in which your institution 
engaged in table-funding activities by providing the funds for closing.  These loans 
are originated by another company, closed in the other company’s name using your 
funds, assigned to your institution, and subsequently either sold in the secondary 
market or held for investment by your institution. Please utilize the definitions for retail 
production when filling out this section.
I230 Wholesale Brokered The dollar amount and number of loans in I100—Total—obtained by your institution 
from mortgage brokers. These loans are originated by a broker, funded by your 
institution, and subsequently either sold to the secondary market or held for 
investment by your institution. A broker is a person who generally closes a mortgage 
loan in the name of the lender who commissioned the broker's services. A mortgage 
broker will not service the mortgage loan. Please utilize the definitions for retail 
production when filling out this section.
I240 Total Residential First Mortgages CALCULATED: The sum of I210 to I230 for the relevant column. Sum must equal 
value in relevant column of I100.
I250 Fixed Rate The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans in which the mortgage 
rate remains fixed throughout the life of the loan, for example, 15-year, 20-year, and 
30-year loans. This amount is calculated automatically as the sum of 
Government—Fixed, Prime Conforming— Fixed, Prime-Non-Conforming—Fixed, and 
Other—Fixed.
I251 ARM The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans that have a mortgage 
rate that adjusts according to a specified price index periodically and as agreed to at 
the inception of the loan. Include 1 year ARMs, 6-month ARMs, fixed-period ARMs, 
two-step mortgages, and other adjustable rate mortgages. Include interest-only 
mortgages that are adjustable. This amount is calculated automatically as the sum of 
Government—ARM, Prime Conforming—ARMs, Prime-Non- Conforming—ARM, and 
Other—ARM
I259 Total Residential First Mortgages CALCULATED: The sum of I250 and I251 for the relevant column. Sum must equal 
value in relevant column of I100.
I260 Jumbo The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential first-lien mortgage loans that 
exceed the legislated conforming loan purchase limits of Fannie Mae and Freddie 
Mac. Include all jumbo loans, whether agency eligible, Alt-A, or subprime. Must be 
equal to or greater than the sum of Prime Jumbo Fixed and ARM above - i.e., the 
sum of I050 and I060)
I261 Non-Jumbo The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential first-lien mortgage loans that 
do not exceed the legislated conforming loan purchase limits of Fannie Mae and 
Freddie Mac.
I269 Total Residential First Mortgages CALCULATED: The sum of I260 and I261 for the relevant column. Sum must equal 
value in relevant column of I100.
I270 Alt Doc The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential reduced documentation 
loans to all types of borrowers originated without full income and full asset 
documentation. Examples of such loans are Stated Income, Stated Income/Stated 
Asset, and No Income/No Asset.
I271 Full Doc The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans to all types of 
borrowers originated with full income and full asset documentation.
I279 Total Residential First Mortgages CALCULATED: The sum of I270 and I271 for the relevant column. Sum must equal 
value in relevant column of I100.
I280 Interest Only The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans that after the initial 
period in which the borrower pays only the interest portion, the loan would convert to 
payments of principal and interest amortized over the remaining life of the loan. The 
interest rate can either be adjustable, or remain fixed through the life of the loan.
Page 10 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
I281 Not Interest Only The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans that are not considered 
“Interest Only” by the definition in I280 above. The interest rate remains fixed through 
the life of the loan.
I289 Total Residential First Mortgages CALCULATED: The sum of I280 and I281 for the relevant column. Sum must equal 
value in relevant column of I100.
I290 Option ARMs The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans that offer flexible 
payment options. For example, one of the most common types of Option ARMs allows 
for 4 payment options: minimum payment, interest only, 30 year full principal and 
interest, and 15 year full principal and interest. Option ARM programs may vary by a 
number of factors: initial rate, negative amortization and lifetime caps, ARM index and 
other optional features. Option ARMs are sometimes referred to as the Pick-a
Payment Option ARM, Pay Option ARM, 1 Month Option ARM, or Cash Flow Option 
ARM.
I291 Not Option ARMs The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans that are not considered 
“Option ARMs” by the definition in I290 above.
I299 Total Residential First Mortgages CALCULATED: The sum of I290 and I291 for the relevant column. Sum must equal 
value in relevant column of I100.
I300 Loans with Prepayment Penalties The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans that require the 
borrower to pay a penalty if they are paid off before a specified date in the loan 
agreement.
I301 Loans without Prepayment Penalties The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans that do not require a 
penalty payment if they are paid off before a specified date in the loan agreement.
I309 Total Residential First Mortgages CALCULATED: The sum of I300 and I301 for the relevant column. Sum must equal 
value in relevant column of I100.
I310 Purchase The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans whose purpose is for 
borrower purchase.
I311 Refinance Rate-Term The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans whose purpose is for 
borrower rate-term refinance.
I312 Refinance Cash-Out Refinances The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans whose purpose is for 
borrower cash-out refinance.
I313 Refinance Restructure The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans that have been 
refinanced for purposes of restructuring the terms of the loan (e.g., interest rate, 
amortization period, etc.).
I314 Refinance Other/Unknown The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans that have been 
refinanced for other or unknown purposes than those described above.
I319 Total Residential First Mortgages CALCULATED: The sum of I310 through I314 for the relevant column. Sum must 
equal value in relevant column of I100.
I330 Loans with Mortgage Insurance The dollar amount and number of single-family loans that are insured with mortgage 
insurance (MI).
I331 Loans without Mortgage Insurance The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans that are not insured 
with mortgage insurance (MI).
I339 Total Residential First Mortgages CALCULATED: The sum of I330 and I331 for the relevant column. Sum must equal 
value in relevant column of I100.
I340 Loans with Piggyback Seconds The dollar amount and number of residential (1- to 4-unit) loans that also have 
piggyback second mortgages that are subordinate to them. A “piggyback” is a second 
mortgage closed at the same time as the first mortgage for which it is subordinate, 
usually for the purposes of avoiding mortgage insurance. Do not include HELOCs.
I341 Loans without Piggyback Seconds The dollar amount and number of residential (1- to 4-unit) loans that do not have 
piggyback second mortgages that are subordinate to them
I349 Total Residential First Mortgages CALCULATED: The sum of I340 and I341 for the relevant column. Sum must equal 
value in relevant column of I100.
First Mortgage Loan-to-Value (LTV) Distribution 
I370 Equals 60% or less The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans with loan to- value 
ratios equal to or less than 60%.
I371 Greater than 60% but less than or equal to 70% The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans with loan to- value 
ratios greater than 60% but equal to or less than 70%.
I372 Greater than 70% but less than or equal to 80% The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans with loan to- value 
ratios greater than 70% but equal to or less than 80%.
I373 Greater than 80% but less than or equal to 90% The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans with loan to- value 
ratios greater than 80% but equal to or less than 90%.
I374 Greater than 90% but less than or equal to 100% The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans with loan to- value 
ratios greater than 90% but equal to or less than 100%.
Page 11 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
I375 Greater than 100% The dollar amount and number of 1- to 4-unit residential loans with loan to- value 
ratios greater than 100%.
I379 Total First Mortgage Volume CALCULATED: The sum of I370 to I375 for the relevant column. Sum must equal 
value in relevant column of I100.
I380 Weighted Average LTV on First Mortgages Only 
(enter two-decimal figure, e.g., 87.65 for 87.645% 
weighted LTV) 
The weighted average loan-to-value ratio, of 1- to 4-unit residential first lien mortgage 
loans based on dollar volume.
I385 Weighted Average CLTV Combined First and 
Second Mortgages (enter two-decimal figure, e.g., 
87.65 for 87.645% weighted CLTV) 
The weighted average combined loan-to-value ratio, of all 1-to 4-unit residential first
lien mortgage loans and second mortgage loans, based on dollar volume.
I390 Weighted Average Coupon at Origination on First 
Mortgages Only (enter two-decimal figure, e.g., 
6.78 for 6.775%) 
The weighted average gross coupon (interest rate found on the legal document 
known as the “Note”), in percentage terms (e.g., 6.55%), of all 1-to 4-unit residential 
first mortgage loan originations during the reporting period, based on dollar volume.
First Mortgage Residential Loans Sold by Investor Type 
I400 Production Sold to Secondary Market Agencies 
(Fannie, Freddie, Ginnie) 
The dollar amount and number of 1 – 4 unit residential loans sold by your institution to 
secondary market agencies (Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae) or to others 
with a secondary marketing agency guarantee. This section refers to any loan which 
your company originated and then sold during the period. These loans were not 
necessarily originated during the reporting quarter.
I401 Production Sold to Others (Non-Affiliate) The dollar amount and number of 1 – 4 unit residential loans sold by your institution to 
other mortgage wholesalers, brokers, correspondents, or conduits that are not 
affiliated with your institution. This should exclude loans servicing released that are 
reported on row I410 below. This section refers to any loan which your company 
originated and then sold during the period. These loans were not necessarily 
originated during the reporting quarter.
I402 Production Sold to Others (Affiliate) The dollar amount and number of 1 – 4 unit residential loans sold by your institution to 
affiliated companies. This should exclude loans servicing released that are reported 
on row I410 below. This section refers to any loan which your company originated and 
then sold during the period. These loans were not necessarily originated during the 
reporting quarter.
I404 Production Sold through Non-Agency 
Securitizations with Sale Treatment 
The dollar amount and number of 1 – 4 unit residential loans sold by your institution 
through non-agency securitizations where FAS 140 sale treatment was achieved.
I405 Production Sold through Non-Agency 
Securitizations without Sale Treatment 
The dollar amount and number of 1 – 4 unit residential loans sold by your institution 
through non-agency securitizations where FAS 140 sale treatment was not achieved. 
These loans are accounted for as financings.
I409 Total 1- 4 Unit Residential Loans Sold this Period CALCULATED: The sum of rows I400, I401, I402, I404, and I405 for the 
corresponding column.
Other 1-4 Unit Residential Information
I410 Production Sold Servicing Released The dollar amount and number of 1 – 4 unit residential loans sold by your institution 
with the servicing released. 
I421 Production Kept in Portfolio/Held for Investment The dollar amount and number of 1-4 unit residential loans kept in your portfolio or 
held for investment
I430 Pull-Through Ratio (enter two-decimal figure, e.g., 
67.55 for 67.545%) 
The number of 1 -4 unit residential loan closings divided by the number of 
applications during the reporting period. 
Warehouse Period 
I450 Average Days in Warehouse1-4 Unit Residential 
Mortgages Only 
The average number of days 1- to 4-unit residential mortgage loans have been in 
warehouse before sold to an investor. Include only loans held for sale.
I460 Production Warehoused in Excess of 90 Days as 
of Period End 1-4 Unit Residential Mortgages 
Only 
The principal balance and loan count of 1- to 4-unit residential mortgage loans that 
have been in warehouse before sold to an investor for more than 90 days as of the 
end of the reporting period.
RMLA SECTION III
Modifications
This section refers to modifications on loans you do not hold or service.
A loan modification occurs when the interest rate or terms of the loan have been changed, but the loan is not satisfied and replaced by a new loan. Note: 
Some transactions under Regulations Z Section 226.20 (a) will be considered a modification for purposes of the NMLS Mortgage Call Report.  
Data Format:
UPB ($) – Positive dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals.  
Loan Count (#) – Positive whole number. Do not enter any symbols.  
Page 12 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
S100 Loan Modification Applications in process at 
beginning of period
Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans fitting this description during this period.
S150 Loan Modification applications received during 
period
Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans fitting this description during this period.
S130 Loan modification applications denied by 
lender/servicer
Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans fitting this description during this period.
S120 Loan Modification applications terminated by 
borrower
Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans fitting this description during this period.
S140 Loan Modification applications terminated by otherEnter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans fitting this description during this period.
S110 Loan Modifications completed (non-HAMP) Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans fitting this description during this period.
S115 Mortgage Loans Modified Under HAMP Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans fitting this description during this period.
S160 Loan Modification applications in process at end 
of period
Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans fitting this description during this period.
Contracted for by Lienholder/Servicer
S200 Loans to be modified at beginning of period Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans fitting this description during this period.
S230 New loans received for modification Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans fitting this description during this period.
S220 Loan modification attempts terminated for 
whatever reason
Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans fitting this description during this period.
S210 Loan Modifications completed Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans fitting this description during this period.
S240 Loans to be modified at the end of period. Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans fitting this description during this period.
Payment Status as of End Date (All Loans)
S300 Current Loans Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans you are servicing that fit this description 
during this period. Include loans you service which are current. 
S305 30 to 59 Days Delinquent Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans you are servicing that fit this description 
during this period.
S310 60 to 89 Days Delinquent Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans you are servicing that fit this description 
during this period.
S315 90+ Days Delinquent Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans you are servicing that fit this description 
during this period.
S319 Totals Loans Serviced Equals the sum of all rows S300 to S315 for the corresponding column.  
Payment Status as of End Date (Loans Modified within one (1) year)
S320 Current Loans Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans you are servicing that fit this description 
during this period. Include loans you service which are current. 
S325 30 to 59 Days Delinquent Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans you are servicing that fit this description 
during this period.
S330 60 to 89 Days Delinquent Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans you are servicing that fit this description 
during this period.
S335 90+ Days Delinquent Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans you are servicing that fit this description 
during this period.
S339 Totals Loans Serviced (Loans Modified within one 
(1) year)
Equals the sum of all rows S320 to S335 for the corresponding column.  
Payment Status as of End Date (Loans Modified over one (1) year ago)
S340 Current Loans Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans you are servicing that fit this description 
during this period. Include loans you service which are current. 
S345 30 to 59 Days Delinquent Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans you are servicing that fit this description 
during this period.
S350 60 to 89 Days Delinquent Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans you are servicing that fit this description 
during this period.
S355 90+ Days Delinquent Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans you are servicing that fit this description 
during this period.
S359 Totals Loans Serviced (Loans Modified over one 
(1) year ago)
Equals the sum of all rows S340 to S355 for the corresponding column.  
Foreclosure Status as of End Date
1 year refers to the last 12 months of activity
This section refers to modifications on loans you hold or service.
1 year refers to the last 12 months of activity
Page 13 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
S400 In foreclosure status as of last period end date Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans you are servicing that fit this description 
during this period.
S410 Moved into foreclosure status in Period Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans you are servicing that fit this description 
during this period.
S420 Foreclosure resolved other than Sheriff sale in 
Period 
Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans you are servicing that fit this description 
during this period.
S430 Foreclosure resulting in Sheriff sale in Period Enter the UPB and Loan Count for any loans you are servicing that fit this description 
during this period.
S440 In foreclosure status as of End Date Equals S400 + S410 - S420 - S430 for the corresponding column.
S450 REOs as of End Date Enter UPB and Loan Count for any real estate owned.
S460 Loans Paid Through Short Sale Enter the UPB and Loan Count of Mortgage Loans paid through short sale during this 
quarter.
Servicing Activity
S510 Wholly Owned Loans Serviced Enter the UPB and Loan Count for loans that you are servicing and for which you 
retain all ownership rights.
S520 Loans Serviced Under MSRs Enter the UPB and Loan Count for loans that you are servicing and for which you own 
only the Mortgage Servicing Rights.  Report the owner of the loan not the owner of the 
MSR.
S530 Subservicing for Others Enter the UPB and Loan Count for loans that you are subservicing on behalf of 
others.
S540 Subservicing by Others Enter the UPB and Loan Count for loans that are Wholly Owned or for which you own 
the Mortgage Servicing Rights and have contracted with a third-party to service on 
your behalf.
S590 Totals Loans Serviced Equals the sum of all rows S510 to S540 for the corresponding column.  
Rate Type on Loans Serviced
S600 Fixed Loans Serviced Enter the UPB and Loan Count of all loans you service, including those serviced for 
others, in which the mortgage interest rate remains fixed throughout the life of the 
loan.
S610 ARM Loans Serviced Enter the UPB and Loan Count of all loans you service, including those serviced for 
others, in which the mortgage interest rate changes according to a specified price 
index periodically and as agreed to at the inception of the loan.
S690 Total Rate Type Equals the sum of rows S600 to S610 for the corresponding column.  
Loan Type on Loans Serviced
S700 Government (FHA/VA/RHS) Loans Serviced Enter the UPB and Loan Count of all 1-4 unit residential first mortgage loans you 
service, including those serviced for others, that are guaranteed or insured by the 
government (FHA/VA/RHS and including bond or state assisted loans.
S710 Conventional Conforming Loans Serviced Enter the UPB and Loan Count of all 1-4 unit residential first mortgage loans you 
service, including those serviced for others, that are eligible for sale to Fannie 
Mae/Freddie Mac.
S720 Conventional Non-Conforming Loans Serviced Enter the UPB and Loan Count of all other 1-4 unit residential first mortgage loans 
you service that are not reported above, including Alt-A and nonprime credit grade 
whose balances exceed Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac loan limits.  Nonprime loans are 
considered those to lower credit quality borrowers(generally <620 FICO) who do not 
qualify for prime or Alt-A loans.  They often contain other risky features such as high 
loan-to-value (LTV) ratios and limited documentation.
S730 Other Loans Serviced Enter the UPB and Loan Count of all other 1-4 unit residential first mortgage loans 
you service that are not reported above.
S790 Total Residential First Mortgage Loans Serviced Equals the sum of rows S700 to S730 for the corresponding column.  
Other Residential Mortgages
S800 Closed-End Second Mortgages Loans Serviced Enter the UPB and Loan Count for mortgages that you service that have rights 
subordinated to a first mortgage.  Do not include lines of credit such as HELOC 
commitments.
S810 HELOC Loans Serviced Enter the Loan Amount and Loan Count for HELOC mortgages that you service. 
Report the maximum amount of the credit line.
S820 Reverse Mortgages Loans Serviced Enter the UPB and Loan Count of home equity loans for homeowners 62 years of age 
or older, advanced as a lump sum at closing, regular payments over a time period, or 
as a line of credit that do not require repayment as long as the home remains the 
principal residence of the borrower, that you service.
Page 14 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
S840 Other Loans Serviced Enter the UPB and Loan Count of all other mortgages not reported above.
S890 Total Other Mortgage Loans Serviced Equals the sum of rows S800 to S840 for the corresponding column.  
S900 Total Mortgages Serviced Equals the sum of rows S790 and S890 for the corresponding column.  Must equal 
total in S590.
Serviced Loans LTV Distribution
S1000 Equals 60% or less The UPB and Loan Count of 1-4 unit first mortgage residential loans with current  loan
to-value ratios ≤60% that you service. Use the most recent appraised value. LTV= 
(Mortgage Loan Amount or UPB/ Most recent appraised value)
S1010 Greater than 60% but less than or equal to 70% The UPB and Loan Count of 1-4 unit first mortgage residential loans with current loan
to-value ratios >60% and ≤70% that you service. Use the most recent appraised 
value. LTV= (Mortgage Loan Amount or UPB/ Most recent appraised value)
S1020 Greater than 70% but less than or equal to 80% The UPB and Loan Count of 1-4 unit first mortgage residential loans with current loan
to-value ratios >70% and ≤80% that you service.  Use the most recent appraised 
value. LTV= (Mortgage Loan Amount or UPB/ Most recent appraised value)
S1030 Greater than 80% but less than or equal to 90% The UPB and Loan Count of 1-4 unit first mortgage residential loans with current loan
to-value ratios >80% and ≤90% that you service.  Use the most recent appraised 
value. LTV= (Mortgage Loan Amount or UPB/ Most recent appraised value)
S1040 Greater than 90% but less than or equal to 100% The UPB and Loan Count of 1-4 unit first mortgage residential loans with current loan
to-value ratios >90% and ≤100% that you service.  Use the most recent appraised 
value. LTV= (Mortgage Loan Amount or UPB/ Most recent appraised value)
S1050 Greater than 100% The UPB and Loan Count of 1-4 unit first mortgage residential loans with current loan
to-value ratios >100% that you service.  Use the most recent appraised value. LTV= 
(Mortgage Loan Amount or UPB/ Most recent appraised value)
S1090 Total Residential First Mortgage Loans Serviced Equals the sum of rows S1000 to S1050 for the corresponding column.  
S1100 Gross Revenue from Mortgage Servicing 
Operations
All revenue from mortgage servicing operations received by your company on 
mortgage loans in this state during the reporting period before any expenses are 
deducted.
Loans Serviced Under MSRs
S520A NMLS ID, Owner Name, Pool #, UPB, and Loan 
Count
Enter information into the NMLS ID, Owner Name, Pool #, UPB, and Loan Count 
fields.  If the owner does not have an NMLS ID, this field can be left blank.
S520TOT Total Loans Serviced Under MSRs Equals the sum of rows for the corresponding column.  
Loans Serviced for Others (Subservicing)
S530A NMLS ID, Owner Name, Pool #, UPB, and Loan 
Count
Enter information into the NMLS ID, Owner Name, Pool #, UPB, and Loan Count 
fields.  If the owner does not have an NMLS ID, this field can be left blank.
S530TOT Total Loans Serviced for Others (Subservicing) Equals the sum of rows for the corresponding column.  
Loans Serviced by Others
S540A NMLS ID, Servicer Name, Pool #, UPB, and Loan 
Count
Enter information into the NMLS ID, Servicer Name, Pool #, UPB, and Loan Count 
fields.  If the servicer does not have an NMLS ID, this field can be left blank.  If the 
Pool # is unknown, this field can also be left blank.
S540TOT Total Loans Serviced by Others Equals the sum of rows for the corresponding column.  
Page 15 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
Commercial Loan Origination
Commercial Real Estate
SF010 Construction The dollar amount and number of loans for the purpose of funding commercial real 
estate development.  This includes loans to builders for the construction of residential, 
commercial, industrial buildings.  These are not direct loans to consumers to finance 
the building of their home.
SF020 Multifamily Residential Properties (5 or More) The dollar amount and number of loans secured by residential real estate with 5 or 
more units.  This includes mixed use properties that are primarily for residential use.
SF030 1 -4 Family Residential Investment Properties with 
Business Ownership
The dollar amount and number of loans secured by 1-4 family residential properties 
that are non-owner occupied and for investment purposes (e.g. repayment based on 
property cash flow). The borrower is a business entity.
SF035 1-4 Family Residential Investment Properties with 
Natural Person Ownership
The dollar amount and number of loans secured by 1-4 family residential properties 
that are non-owner occupied and for investment purposes. (e.g. repayment based on 
property cash flow). The borrower is a natural person.
SF040 Commercial Nonresidential Properties The dollar amount and number of loans secured by Commercial Real Estate 
properties with no residential components.
SF050 Other Secured Commercial Real Estate Loans The dollar amount and number of Commercial Real Estate loans that do not fit in 
above categories.
SF090 Total Commercial Real Estate Sum of line items SF010 to SF050
Commercial and Industrial
SF100 Secured by 1-4 Family Residential Properties The dollar amount and number of Commercial and Industrial loans to businesses that 
are primarily secured by liens on 1-4 family residential real estate.
SF110 Secured The dollar amount and number of Commercial and Industrial loans secured by non
real estate liens such as UCC-1 on equipment or receivables.
SF120 Unsecured The dollar amount and number of Commercial and Industrial loans that are not 
secured
SF190 Total Commercial and Industrial Sum of line items SF100 to SF120
Consumer Loan Origination
Consumer
SF200 Motor Vehicle Installment Sale Contracts The dollar amount and number of transactions in which a buyer purchases a motor 
vehicle from a retail seller pursuant to a retail installment sales contract.  
SF210 Non-Motor Vehicle, Non-Residential Installment 
Sale Contracts
The dollar amount and number of transactions in which a buyer purchases goods or 
services, not including motor vehicles or a residence, from a retail seller pursuant to a 
retail installment sales contract. 
SF220 Non-Mortgage Secured Direct Loans The dollar amount and number of loans provided directly to the borrower secured by a 
lien on non-mortgage collateral.  Examples include direct automobile, watercraft, and 
equipment financing. 
SF230 Unsecured Direct Loans The dollar amount and number of loans provided directly to the borrower that are not 
secured by any type of collateral. 
SF290 Total Consumer Sum of line items SF200 to SF230
Commercial Loan Servicing
Commercial Real Estate
SF300 Construction The UPB and loan count of loans you service for the purpose of funding commercial 
real estate development.  This includes loans to builders for the construction of 
residential, commercial, industrial buildings.  These are not direct loans to consumers 
to finance the building of their home.
Supplemental State-Specific Form
Data Format:
Loan Amount ($) – Positive dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals.  
Loan Count (#) – Positive whole number. Do not enter any symbols.  
Data Format:
UPB ($) – Positive dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals.  
Loan Count (#) – Positive whole number. Do not enter any symbols.  
Page 16 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
SF310 Multifamily Residential Properties (5 or More) The UPB and loan count of loans you service secured by residential real estate with 5 
or more units.  This includes mixed use properties that are primarily for residential 
use.
SF320 1 -4 Family Residential Investment Properties with 
Business Ownership
The UPB and loan count of loans you service secured by 1-4 family residential 
properties that are non-owner occupied and for investment purposes (e.g. repayment 
based on property cash flow). The borrower is a business entity.
SF325 1-4 Family Residential Investment Properties with 
Natural Person Ownership
The UPB and loan count of loans you service secured by 1-4 family residential 
properties that are non-owner occupied and for investment purposes (e.g. repayment 
based on property cash flow). The borrower is a natural person.
SF330 Commercial Nonresidential Properties The UPB and loan count of loans you service secured by Commercial Real Estate 
properties with no residential components.
SF340 Other Secured Commercial Real Estate Loans The UPB and loan count of Commercial Real Estate loans you service that do not fit 
in above categories.
SF390 Total Commercial Real Estate Sum of SF300 to SF350
Commercial and Industrial
SF400 Secured by 1-4 Family Residential Properties The UPB and loan count of Commercial and Industrial loans to businesses you 
service that are primarily secured by liens on 1-4 family residential real estate.
SF410 Secured The UPB and loan count of Commercial and Industrial loans you service secured by 
non-real estate liens such as UCC-1 on equipment or receivables.
SF420 Unsecured The UPB and loan count of Commercial and Industrial loans you service that are not 
secured
SF490 Total Commercial and Industrial The sum of line items SF400 to SF420
Consumer Loan Servicing
Consumer
SF500 Motor Vehicle Installment Sale Contracts The UPB and count of transactions you service in which a buyer purchases a motor 
vehicle from a retail seller pursuant to a retail installment sales contract.  
SF510 Non-Motor Vehicle, Non-Residential Installment 
Sale Contracts
The UPB and count of transactions you service in which a buyer purchases goods or 
services, not including motor vehicles or a residence, from a retail seller pursuant to a 
retail installment sales contract. 
SF520 Non-Mortgage Secured Direct Loans The UPB and loan count of loans you service provided directly to the borrower 
secured by a lien on non-mortgage collateral.  Examples include direct automobile, 
watercraft, and equipment financing. 
SF530 Unsecured Direct Loans The UPB and loan count of loans you service provided directly to the borrower that 
are not secured by any type of collateral. 
SF590 Total Consumer Sum of SF500 to SF530
Licensed Processors and Underwriters
SF600 Applications In Process at Beginning of Quarter Number of applications assigned by a third-party entity for processing or underwriting 
that were outstanding at the end of the previous period.
SF610 Applications Received for 
Processing/Underwriting During the Quarter
Applications you received during the period from a third-party entity for processing or 
underwriting.  These applications are contracted to be returned to the third-party entity 
for a lending decision. 
SF620 Applications Returned to Creditor, Incomplete All assigned applications returned to the originating third-party entity because the 
processor or underwriter could not complete the processing or underwriting due to a 
non-responsive borrower. 
SF630 Net Changes in Application Amount Any changes to the loan amount that occurred while the loan was assigned to you by 
a third-party entity for processing or underwriting. This entry must be expressed as a 
positive or negative adjustment. This line only allows changes to the application 
amount.
Enter the type of action taken on applications during the period.
Data Format:
Amount ($ US Dollars) - Positive dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals. 
Count (#) - Positive whole number. Do not enter any symbols.
Page 17 of 35
Item #
Name
Definitions and Instructions
SF640
Other Changes to Applications
SF650
Any other changes, directed by the assigning third party entity not meeting the 
definition in SF630
Applications Processed/Underwritten, Completed All assigned  applications, which were returned to the originating third party entity as 
complete and ready for the third party entity to render a lending decision.
SF660
Applications In Process at End of Quarter
Revenue Data
Number of applications assigned by a third-party entity for processing or underwriting 
outstanding at the end of the period.
SF1100
Gross Revenue from All Mortgage Operations
All revenue from whatever source received by your company on mortgage loans in 
this state during the reporting period before any expenses are deducted. Include 
gross revenue from sales of mortgages at or subsequent to closing and from any 
other mortgage related activity.
Page 18 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
SCHEDULE A: ASSETS
Current Assets
Cash and Current Securities
A010 Cash and Cash Equivalents, Unrestricted Cash and cash equivalents as defined in Paragraphs 7 and 8 of FAS 95. Includes 
only unrestricted funds. Does not include escrow funds for payment of mortgagors' 
taxes, insurance, and related items, or other fiduciary funds
A034 Securities Available for Sale Securities that the lender does NOT have the positive intent and ability to hold to 
maturity, yet does NOT intend to actively trade. Must be reported at fair market value 
(per FAS 115 and FAS 140) with changes in values included in the other 
comprehensive income on the balance sheet. This is the sum of certain line items on 
schedule A-030.
A036 Trading Account Securities Securities that are routinely traded and sold as a course of normal business 
operations. Includes MBS intended for immediate or near-term sale, including MBS 
held in conjunction with mortgage banking activities. Must be reported at fair market 
value (per FAS 115 and FAS 140) with changes in value (i.e., unrealized gains/loss) 
included in earnings. This is the sum of certain line items on schedule A-030.
A038 Marketable Equity Securities Marketable equity securities include shares of common stock  which are traded on a 
stock exchange and for which there are quoted market prices
A039 Total Cash and Current Securities CALCULATED: A010 + A034 + A036 + A038
Mortgage Loans - Held for Sale
A060 Mortgage Loans Held for Sale (HFS), at Lower of 
Cost or Market (LOCOM) 
Residential (1-4 unit), multifamily, and commercial loans, including farm loans, held 
for sale that are carried at lower of cost or market. This line should not include any 
loans held for sale where fair value option was elected under FAS 159 (which should 
be reported on A062) The total, which is the sum of certain line items on schedule A
060, is net of valuation allowances and deferred fees and costs.
A062 Mortgage Loans Held for Sale (HFS), at Fair 
Value 
Residential (1-4 unit), multifamily, and commercial loans, including farm loans, held 
for single-family sale where the fair value option was elected under FAS 159. This is 
the sum of certain line items on schedule A-060.
A063 Total Mortgage Loans - Held for Sale CALCULATED: A060 + A062
A230B Accrued Interest Receivable Accrued interest receivable due on loans, securities, and other investments.
A230C Accounts Receivable Trade accounts receivable.
A190 Receivables from Related Parties Receivables due from related parties within a year -- affiliates, officers, stockholders, 
and employees. This should not include mortgage loan interest receivable (which is 
reported on line A230B) or accounts receivable (which are reported on line A230C).
A050 Receivables from Unrelated Parties Non-mortgage notes, advances and other receivables that are not due from related 
parties (affiliates, officers, stockholders, employees), not reported on a separate line 
on this form, and that are considered collectable in the normal course of business. 
This should not include mortgage loan interest receivable (which is reported on line 
A230B) or accounts receivable (which is reported on line A230C).
A040 Reverse Repurchase Agreements Outstanding balance on repurchase agreements for which the institution serves as 
the "buyer-lender."
A237 Total Current Assets CALCULATED: A039 + A063 + A230B + A230C + A190 + A050 + A040
Long-Term Assets
A020 Cash and Cash Equivalents, Restricted Cash and cash equivalents whose use in whole or in part is restricted for specific 
purposes under contractual agreements. Does not include escrow funds for payment 
of mortgagors' taxes, insurance, and related items, or other fiduciary funds
Financial Condition
Data Format:
$ – US Dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals.  
Page 19 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
A030 Securities Held to Maturity, at Amortized Cost Securities that the lender has the positive intent and ability to hold to maturity. Unless 
the fair value option was elected under FAS 159, these securities are carried at 
amortized historical cost subject to write-downs for other than temporary impairment. 
Includes both short- and long-term held-to-maturity investments. The total, which is 
the sum of certain line items on schedule A-030, is net of unamortized deferred fees 
and costs.
A032 Securities Held to Maturity, at Fair Value Securities where the fair value option was elected under FAS 159. These securities 
are carried at fair value. This is the sum of certain line items on schedule A-030.
A033 Total Cash and Long-Term Securities CALCULATED: A020 + A030 + A032
A064 Mortgage Loans Held for Investment (HFI), at 
Amortized Cost 
The UPB of residential (1-4 unit), multifamily, and commercial loans, including farm 
loans, held for investment, including undisbursed funds and net of premiums or 
discounts and related amortization. The total, which is the sum of certain line items on 
schedule A-060, is net of reserves for credit losses and unamortized deferred fees 
and costs.
A066 Mortgage Loans Held for Investment (HFI), at Fair 
Value 
The UPB of residential (1-4 unit), multifamily, and commercial loans, including farm 
loans, held for investment where the fair value option was elected under FAS 159. 
This is the sum of certain line items on schedule A-060.
A067 Total Mortgage Loans - Held for Investment CALCULATED: A064 + A066
A160 Mortgage Servicing Rights From Schedule A-160. Includes both MSRs carried at amortized cost net of any 
valuation allowance and MSRs carried at fair value.
A080 Non-Mortgage Long-Term Investments The UPB of investments not secured by mortgage property and not included in other 
line items. Consumer loans and investments in certificates of deposit, annuities, 
stocks and bonds should be included here. Do not include Other Financial 
Instruments (which are reported in item A070).
A070 Other Financial Instruments, at Fair Value Fair value of other financial instruments where the fair value option was elected under 
FAS 159, and where the fair value is an asset. This should not include “loans held for 
sale, at fair value” or “loans held for investment, at fair value” because they are 
reported separately.
A090 Other Real Estate Owned, at Net Realizable 
Value 
Sum of line items A090A and A090B from Schedule A-090. This includes only real 
estate acquired through foreclosure, deed-in-lieu, or similar means (net of any related 
valuation allowances).
A100 Investment in Joint Ventures, Partnerships, and 
Other Entities 
Equity in unconsolidated joint ventures, partnerships, subsidiaries, affiliates or other 
legal entities accounted for using the equity method of accounting.
A110 Real Estate Investments The carrying value of real estate owned not included in line item A090. This includes 
any real estate that was purchased and excludes real estate acquired through 
foreclosure, deed-in-lieu, or similar means.
A170 Reserve for Other Losses - Contra Reserves or allowances for assets on the balance sheet that are not reported 
elsewhere. This line should not include “Reserves for Credit Losses On Loans Held 
For Investment”, (which should be reported on line AO64AF), LOCOM valuation 
allowances on loans held for sale (which should be reported on line A060AE), and the 
“OREO Valuation Allowance” (which should be reported on line A090B). This line 
should include things like allowances for uncollectible receivables. This must equal 
line O250 on Schedule O and it must be less than or equal to zero.
A180 Property, Equipment, Leasehold, Net of 
Accumulated Depreciation 
Total cost of fixed assets, net of accumulated depreciation and amortization. You 
must also complete the Memo field in item A250 below to report certain types of 
property and equipment.
A210 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets Unamortized cost of "goodwill" (excess of cost over fair market value of identifiable 
net assets acquired), net of any impairment adjustments. Includes organization costs 
and other intangible assets not included in any of the above items.
A220 Derivative Assets This is a total from the Derivatives schedule A-220. It includes any derivative 
investments/instruments that are required to be carried on the balance sheet as 
derivative assets according to the provisions of FAS 133 and subsequent 
amendments.
A200 Deferred Tax Assets If taxes are receivable, this value will be positive. If taxes are payable, report the 
balance on the “Deferred Tax Liability” line, item B200. Current taxes receivable 
should be included in line item A390 and current taxes payable should be included in 
the “Other Short-Term Liabilities” line, item B120.
Page 20 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
A230D Servicing Advances Advances made to cover principal and interest payments, taxes and insurance 
payments, and foreclosure advances relating to loans serviced made on behalf of 
mortgagors and mortgage investors.
A230F Foreclosure Claims Receivable Claims receivable from Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, VA, FHA, mortgage insurance 
companies or other guarantors.
A230 Other Assets Includes all other tangible assets that are not already accounted for in other areas of 
the asset section. This is the total from Schedule A230—Other Assets schedule.
A239 Total Long-Term Assets CALCULATED: A033 + A067 + A160 + A080 + A070 + A090 + A100 + A110 + A170 
+ A180 + A210 + A220 + A200 + A230D + A230F + A230
A240 Total Assets CALCULATED: A237 + A239
A250 MEMO: Escrow Funds (Held in Trust for Investors 
or Mortgagors) 
Funds that are held in trust for payment of principal and interest monies held, 
mortgagors' taxes, insurance and related items, or other fiduciary funds. Includes 
restricted cash and buy down escrow accounts. These amounts are not owned by the 
institution so they should not be included in total assets or total liabilities. Companies 
often report this amount on the face of the balance sheet as a memo item under total 
assets with a corresponding memo item under total liabilities & owners equity. The 
amount is only entered once on this form.
A260 MEMO: Capitalized Hardware and Other 
Telecommunications Property and Equipment 
Report the dollar amount of assets related to capitalized hardware and other 
telecommunications equipment that were included in item A180—Property, 
Equipment, and Leasehold. This amount should be net of accumulated depreciation 
and amortization.
A262 MEMO: Capitalized Software Report the dollar amount of assets related to capitalized software that were included 
in item A180—Property, Equipment, and Leasehold. This amount should be net of 
accumulated depreciation and amortization.
A264 MEMO: Watercraft Report the dollar amount of assets related to watercraft that were included in item 
A180—Property, Equipment, and Leasehold. This amount should be net of 
accumulated depreciation and amortization.
A266 MEMO: Aircraft Report the dollar amount of assets related to aircraft that were included in item 
A180—Property, Equipment, and Leasehold. This amount should be net of 
accumulated depreciation and amortization.
SCHEDULE A-030: MORTGAGE SECURITIES
Investment-Grade Securities 
A030A Agency MBS Carrying amount of mortgage-backed securities, both residential (1-to- 4 unit) and 
multifamily, issued by the agencies (Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, Ginnie Mae, etc.).
A030B Non-Agency MBS Carrying amount of residential (1-to-4 unit) mortgage-backed securities issued by a 
non-agency issuer with the equivalent of an investment grade of “AAA”, “AA”, “A”, or 
“BBB” rating by a “nationally recognized statistical rating organization” (“NRSRO”).
A030C Commercial MBS Investment Grade Carrying amount of commercial mortgage-backed securities rated investment grade 
of “AAA”, “AA”, “A”, or “BBB” rating by a NSRO.
A030D Non-Mortgage ABS Investment Grade Carrying amount of non-mortgage asset-backed securities rated investment grade of 
“AAA”, “AA”, “A”, or “BBB” rating by a NSRO.
A030E Obligations of Government Sponsored Enterprise Carrying amount of debt securities issued by a Government Sponsored Enterprise, 
such as Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, or a Federal Home Loan Bank.
A030F U.S. Treasury Obligations Carrying amount of securities that are backed by obligations of the United States 
Treasury.
A030G Other Securities Investment Grade Carrying amount of all other investment grade securities not included above.
A030H Total Investment-Grade Securities CALCULATED: The sum of A030A to A030G for the relevant column.
Non-Investment Grade Securities 
A030L Non-Agency MBS Non-Investment Grade Carrying amount of mortgage-backed securities issued by a non agency issuer with 
the equivalent of a non-investment grade of “BB” or below rating by a NRSRO.
A030M Principal Only Securities Non-Investment Grade Carrying amount of securities in which the holder is entitled to receive predominantly 
principal payments. Include only non-investment grade securities – those with a “BB” 
or below rating by a NRSRO.
Data Format:
$ – Dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals.  
Page 21 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
A030N Interest Only Strips Non-Investment Grade Carrying amount of securities in which the holder is entitled to receive only interest 
payments. Note that any servicing fees retained in excess of a normal servicing fee 
without a legal form as a security (also known as “excess servicing”) should be 
included in mortgage servicing rights on Schedule A-160. Include only non-investment 
grade securities – those with a “BB” or below rating by a NRSRO.
A030O Commercial MBS Non-Investment Grade Carrying amount of commercial mortgage-backed securities rated noninvestment 
grade of “BB” or below rating by a NRSRO.
A030P Debt Securities Non-Investment Grade Carrying amount of debt securities rated non-investment grade of “BB” or below rating 
by a NRSRO.
A030Q Other Securities Non-Investment Grade Carrying amount of all other securities rated non-investment grade of “BB” or below 
rating by a NRSRO.
A030R Total Non-Investment Grade Securities CALCULATED: The sum of A030L to A030Q for the relevant column.
A030S Non-Rated Retained Interests Carrying amount of retained interests from securitizations that are not rated by a 
NRSRO.
A030U Other Securities Carrying amount of other non-rated securities, and all other securities not included 
above.
A030V Total Securities CALCULATED: The sum of A030H, A030R, A030S and A030U for the relevant 
column.
A030W Unamortized Deferred Fees and Costs, if Not 
Included Above 
Unamortized Deferred Fees and Costs related to securities, if not included above.
A030T Net Securities CALCULATED: The sum of A030V and A030W for the relevant column.
SCHEDULE A-060: MORTGAGE LOANS HELD FOR SALE AND HELD FOR INVESTMENT, UPB
Residential First Mortgages (1-4 Unit) 
A060A Government (FHA/VA/RHS) Fixed Unpaid principal balance of 1-to-4 unit residential loans that are guaranteed or 
insured by the government (FHA, VA, or RHS, including bond or state-assisted loans) 
in which the mortgage rate remains fixed throughout the life of the loan, for example, 
15-year, 20- year, and 30 year loans.
A060B Government (FHA/VA/RHS) ARM Unpaid principal balance of 1-to-4 unit residential loans that are guaranteed or 
insured by the government (FHA, VA, or RHS, including bond or state-assisted loans) 
and in which the mortgage rate adjusts according to a specified price index 
periodically and as agreed to at the inception of the loan. FHA Home Equity 
Conversion Mortgages (reverse mortgages) is reported below in item A060N— 
Reverse Mortgages
A060C Conventional Conforming Fixed Unpaid principal balance of 1-to-4 unit residential first mortgage loans that are eligible 
for sale to Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac and in which the mortgage rate remains fixed 
throughout the life of the loan. This should not include FHA and VA loans because 
they are reported separately on this form.
A060D Conventional Conforming ARM Unpaid principal balance of 1-to-4 unit residential first mortgage loans that are eligible 
for sale to Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac and in which the mortgage rate adjusts according 
to a specified price index periodically and as agreed to at the inception of the loan. 
This should not include FHA and VA loans because they are reported separately on 
this form.
A060E Conventional Non-Conforming (Jumbo) Fixed Unpaid principal balance of 1-to-4 unit residential first mortgage loans that are not Alt
A or non-prime credit grade (see definition in A060G below), whose balances exceed 
Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac loan limits and in which the mortgage rate remains fixed 
throughout the life of the loan.
A060F Conventional Non-Conforming (Jumbo) ARM Unpaid principal balance of 1-to-4 unit residential first mortgage loans that are not Alt
A or non-prime credit grade (see definition in A060G below), whose balances exceed 
Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac loan limits and in which the mortgage rate adjusts according 
to a specified price index periodically and as agreed to at the inception of the loan.
A060G Other Fixed Unpaid principal balance of al other 1-to-4 unit residential first mortgage loans not 
reported above, including Alt-A and non-prime credit grade loans and in which the 
mortgage rate remains fixed throughout the life of the loan. Non-prime loans are 
considered those to lower credit quality borrowers (generally <620 FICO) who do not 
qualify for prime or Alt-A loans. They often contain other risky features such as high 
loan to value (LTV) ratios and limited documentation.
Data Format:
$ – Positive (with the exception of A060X to A060AF) dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals.  
Page 22 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
A060H Other ARM Unpaid principal balance of all other 1-to-4 unit residential first mortgage loans not 
reported above, including Alt-A and non-prime credit grade loans (see definition in 
A060G above) and in which the mortgage rate adjusts according to a specified price 
index periodically and as agreed to at the inception of the loan.
A060I Total Residential First Mortgage Loans CALCULATED: The sum of A060A to A060H for the relevant column.
Other Mortgages 
A060L Closed-End Second Mortgages Unpaid principal balance of mortgages that have rights subordinate to a first 
mortgage. Report both fixed rate and adjustable rate second mortgages here. Do not 
include loans under lines of credit that permit borrowers the ability to obtain cash 
advances based on approved line of credit.
A060M HELOCs Principal balance of mortgages that have rights subordinate to a first mortgage. This 
line should include home equity loans that permit borrowers the ability to obtain cash 
advances based on approved line of credit. Report the full amount of the credit line.
A060N Reverse Mortgages Unpaid principal balance of home equity loans for homeowners 62 years of age or 
older, advanced as a lump sum at closing, regular payments over a time period, or as 
a line of credit that do not require any repayment as long as the home remains the 
principal residence of the borrower. This should include FHA Home Equity 
Conversion Mortgages (HECM).
A060O Construction and Land Development Loans Unpaid principal balance of 1- to 4-unit residential construction-to permanent loans to 
home buyers and lot loans to consumers.
A060P Multifamily Loans Agency Unpaid principal balance of mortgages for buildings with more than four residential 
rental units and which are guaranteed or insured by the government (FHA, VA, or 
RHS, including bond or state-assisted loans) or by the agencies (Fannie Mae or A060Q Commercial Mortgage Loans Unpaid principal balance of mortgages for commercial properties such as apartment 
buildings, office towers, industrial buildings, hotels, and retail shopping malls. Do not 
report multifamily loans that are government- or agency-guaranteed, reported above.
A060R Other Mortgage Loans Unpaid principal balance of all other mortgages not reported above, including land 
development loans to builders.
A060V Total Other Loans CALCULATED: The sum of A060L to A060R for the relevant column.
A060W Total Mortgage Loans, UPB (before adjustments) CALCULATED: The sum of A060I and A060V for the relevant column.
Qualified and Non-Qualified Mortgages 
A060W1 Qualified Mortgage (QM) Loans Held for Investment that are QM Loans.  Under Regulation Z (12 CFR 1026), a 
loan that meets the product feature requirements can be a QM under any of three 
main categories: (1) the general definition; (2) the “GSE/agency-eligible” provision; (3) 
the small creditor provision.
A060W2 Non-Qualified Mortgage Loans Held for Investment that are Non-QM Loans. Under Regulation Z (12 CFR 
1026), a loan that meets the product feature requirements can be a QM under any of 
three main categories: (1) the general definition; (2) the “GSE/agency-eligible” 
provision; (3) the small creditor provision.
A060W3 Not Subject to QM Loans being held in a portfolio for investment that were originated prior to the date 
that QM standards went into effect. 
A060W9 Total Loans Equals the sum of rows A060W1 to A060W3 for the corresponding column.  
A060W9_3_T must equal AO60W_3_T.  A060W9_4_T must equal AO60W_4_T. 
Adjustments 
A060X Fair Value Adjustments for Loans Held For Sale 
(for FAS 159) 
Basis adjustments relating to changes in the fair value of loans held for sale. This 
applies to loans held for sale that are carried at fair value (i.e., where the fair value 
option was elected under FAS 159).
A060Y (Discount)/Premium on Loans Contra Discounts or premiums on loans.
Page 23 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
A060Z Other Deferred Fees on Loans Contra Deferred fees on loans per FAS 91. This would include origination fees and 
underwriting fees collected from borrowers. Not applicable for loans carried at fair 
value. This amount must be less than or equal to zero.
A060AA Deferred Costs on Loans Contra Deferred direct origination costs, per FAS 91. Not applicable for loans carried at fair 
value. This amount must be less than or equal to zero.
A060AB Basis Adjustments from Hedging Basis adjustments relating to the effective portion of hedges, per FAS 133 and 
subsequent amendments. Not applicable for loans carried at fair value.
A060AC Other Basis Adjustments Other basis adjustments not reported separately.
A060AD Accum. Amort. of Discounts/Premiums Deferred 
Fees & Cost, and Basis Adjustments 
Accumulated amortization of discounts/premiums, deferred fees and costs, and basis 
adjustments that are required to be amortized in accordance with FAS 91. Only 
applies to loans held for investment that are carried at amortized historical cost. Not 
applicable for loans held for sale or any loans carried at fair value.
A060AE LOCOM Valuation Allowance Contra Lower of Cost or Market (LOCOM) valuation allowance contra amount: Net unrealized 
loss on loans held for sale per FAS 65. This amount must be less than or equal to 
zero.
A060AF Reserve For Credit Losses On Loans Reserve for credit losses on loans held for investment that are recorded at amortized 
cost. Not applicable for loans held for sale or any loans carried at fair value. This must 
equal line O060 on Schedule O.
A060AG Total Adjustments CALCULATED: The sum of A060X to A060AF for the relevant column.
A060T Total Mortgage Loan, UPB (after adjustments) CALCULATED: The sum of A060W and A060AG for the relevant column.
A060AH MEMO: UPB of Loans Included in Total Mortgage 
Loans (before Adjustments) that are Accounted 
for as Financings. 
MEMO: The unpaid principal balance of loans included in the fields on line A060W 
associated with single-family securitizations accounted for as financings rather than 
sales under FAS 140 and subsequent accounting pronouncements. This amount 
should not include any “adjustments” from schedule A-160. These amounts should be 
included in the appropriate loan category above. Note that the debt associated with 
these securitizations is reported separately on a liability line called “Collateralized 
Mortgage Debt Relating To Financings”, item B020.
A060AHNOTE A060AH Explanatory Note - Free Text Free Text
A060AI MEMO: UPB of Loans Included in Total Mortgage 
Loans (before Adjustments) that are on Non
Accrual Status /Non Interest Earning 
The unpaid principal balance of loans included in lines A060W for the relevant 
column that are on non-accrual status (i.e., where interest income is no longer being 
accrued because the loan is delinquent). This amount should not include any 
“adjustments” from schedule A-160.
A060AINOTE A060AI Explanatory Notes Free Text
Schedule A-090: Other Real Estate Owned
A090A Other Real Estate Owned, at Cost Investment in real estate acquired through foreclosure, deed-in lieu, or similar means.
A090B Valuation Allowance Contra The net unrealized loss–the amount by which cost exceeds market value–on real 
estate owned that is reported on line A090A. This amount must be less than or equal 
to zero. This must equal line O130 from Schedule O.
A090T Other Real Estate Owned at Net Realizable Value CALCULATED: Sum of line items A090A and A090B.
SCHEDULE A-120R: ROLLFORWARD OF MORTGAGE SERVICING RIGHTS (MSRs)
Rollforward of Amortized MSRs (excluding Valuation Allowance) 
A120A Balance at Beginning of Period FAS 156 describes two types of servicing rights: “Amortized” (which is the method 
promulgated by FAS 140) and “Fair Value” (which is a new way to account for MSRs if 
the fair value option under FAS 156 is elected). This section is for Amortized servicing 
rights. This line is the net Amortized MSR asset at the beginning of the period. This 
balance should be equal to net Amortized MSR at the end of the last period.
A120B Additions: from Transfers of Financial Assets Amortized MSRs capitalized during the period in conjunction with the sale or 
securitization of loans.
A120C Additions: From Purchases and Other 
Assumptions 
Amortized MSRs purchased or otherwise assumed during the period.
Data Format:
$ – Dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals.  
Data Format:
$ – Dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals.  
Page 24 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
A120D Disposals: Sales and Other The amount of MSRs that was “written-off” as a result of a sale of MSRs during the 
period. Premiums received on loans sold servicing released should not be reported 
here because they should be captured in line item C330. This amount must be less 
than or equal to zero.
A120E Amortization (must be negative) The amount of MSRs that were amortized during the quarter. This amount must be 
less than or equal to zero.
A120F Other Than Temporary Impairment (OTTI) The amount of Amortized MSRs that were written off during the period as a result of 
other than temporary impairment. This amount must be less than or equal to zero.
A120G Basis Adjustments from Net Hedging Activity Basis adjustments relating to the effective portion of hedges of Amortized MSRs, per 
FAS 133 and subsequent amendments. Not applicable for loans carried at fair value.
A120H Other Changes Other changes not reported on a separate line above.
A120T Balance at End of Period CALCULATED: The sum of A120A through A120H.
Rollforward of MSR Valuation Allowance 
A130A Balance at Beginning of Period Amortized MSRs must be stratified by risk characteristics and each stratum is subject 
to an impairment test and LOCOM accounting at the end of each reporting period. 
Any LOCOM amount is posted to a valuation allowance, which can potentially be 
reversed in future periods. This line is the valuation allowance for Amortized MSRs at 
the beginning of the period. It is not applicable for Fair Value MSRs.
A130B Change in Valuation Allowance Changes in the Amortized MSR valuation allowance during the period. This can be a 
positive or a negative number. This is not applicable for Fair Value MSRs.
A130T Balance at End of Period CALCULATED: The sum of A130A and A130B.
A140T Total Amortized MSRs, Net of Valuation 
Allowance, at End of Period 
CALCULATED: Equals A120T minus A130T. This is the net carrying value of 
Amortizing MSRs at the end of the period.
A130E MEMO: Fair Value of Amortized MSRs at End Of 
Period 
This is a memo field only. This is the fair value of the entire Amortizing MSR portfolio 
at the end of the period. The amount should be greater than or equal to line A140T.
Rollforward of Fair Value MSRs 
A150A Balance at Beginning of Period FAS 156 describes two types of servicing rights: “Amortized” (which is the method 
promulgated by FAS 140) and “Fair Value” (which is a new way to account for MSRs if 
the fair value option under FAS 156 is elected). This section is for Fair Value MSRs. 
This line is the net Fair Value MSR asset at the beginning of the period. This balance 
should be equal to net Fair Value MSR at the end of the last period or equal to zero if 
this is the period that the fair value option was elected under FAS 156.
A150B Remeasurement of MSRs to Fair Value upon 
Adoption of FAS 156 
The pretax value of the cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings resulting 
from the FAS 156 election to begin recording an existing class of separately 
recognized MSRs at fair value. This can only be done at the beginning of a fiscal 
year.
A150C Additions: from Transfers of Financial Assets Fair Value MSRs capitalized during the period in conjunction with the sale or 
securitization of loans.
A150D Additions: from Purchases and Other 
Assumptions 
Fair Value MSRs purchased or otherwise assumed during the period.
A150E Reductions: from MSRs Sold The amount of Fair Value MSRs that was “written-off” as a result of a sale of MSRs 
during the period. Premiums received on loans sold servicing released should not be 
reported here because they should be captured in line item C330. This amount must 
be less than or equal to zero.
A150F Change in Value Due to Realization of Cash 
Flows 
Change in value of Fair Value MSRs due to realization of cash flows, per FAS 156.
A150G Change in Value Due to Market And Model 
Changes 
Change in value of Fair Value MSRs due to market and model changes, per FAS 156.
A150H Other Changes Other changes in Fair Value MSRs not reported on a separate line.
A150T Balance at End of Period CALCULATED: The sum of A150A to A150H.
A160T Total MSRs at End of Period CALCULATED: The sum of A140T and A150T.
DERIVATIVE ASSETS: SCHEDULE A-220 (DERIVATIVE LIABILITIES: SCHEDULE B-180)
Data Format:
$ - Dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals.  
Page 25 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
A220A Interest Rate Lock Commitments (IRLCs) Interest rate lock commitments that meet the definition of a derivative in SFAS 133 
and subsequent amendments.
A220B Other Loan Commitments Classified as 
Derivatives 
Other loan commitments that meet the definition of a derivative in SFAS 133 and 
subsequent amendments.
A220C Derivatives Designated as Hedges of Funded 
Loans 
This line item only applies to institutions that utilize derivative instruments and 
designate the derivatives as hedges of closed loans.
A220D Derivatives Designated as Hedges of MSRs This line item applies to entities that participate in Derivative Instruments or Hedging 
Activities. For additional questions, please refer to SFAS133 and/or your internal or 
external consultants.
A220E Derivatives Designated As Hedges Other Derivatives that meet the definition of a derivative and are designated as hedges, as 
specified in SFAS 133 and subsequent amendments. This excludes derivatives 
reported separately on this schedule.
A220F Derivatives Not Designated as Hedges Derivatives that meet the definition of a derivative and are not designated as hedges, 
as specified in SFAS 133 and subsequent amendments. These are often referred to 
as “free standing” derivatives. These include economic hedges of items that are 
reported at fair value (e.g., interest rate lock commitments and loans held for sale 
carried at fair value).
A220T Total Derivatives  (NMLS calculated & view only) CALCULATED: The sum of A220A to A220F for the relevant column. The total in the 
assets column should equal the value in A220. The total in the liabilities column 
should equal the value in B180.
A220G MEMO: UPB of IRLCs before Fallout Adjustments Unpaid principal balance of interest rate lock commitments. This is the gross amount 
before making adjustments for locks that are not expected to close.
A220H MEMO: UPB of IRLCs after Fallout Adjustments Unpaid principal balance of interest rate lock commitments after making adjustments 
for estimated fallout (i.e., excluding part of the balance because some locks are not 
expected to close).
SCHEDULE A-230: OTHER ASSETS
A230A Securities Borrowed Carrying/Value of securities borrowed in connection with repurchase agreements.
A230E Advances Other All other advances not reportable on a separate line. Note that advances to 
employees should be reported in item A190— Receivables from Related Parties.
A230G Current Income Taxes Receivable Current taxes receivable. Note that deferred taxes receivable should be included in 
A200—Deferred Tax Asset.
A230GNOTE A230G Explanatory Notes Free Text
A230H Other Assets Other Include all other tangible assets that are not already accounted for in other areas of 
the asset section. This would include, but is not limited to, lease/rent deposits, utility 
deposits, tax deposits, flexible spending receivables, licenses, prepaid expenses, 
clearing accounts, suspense accounts, commitment fees, and any other tangible 
asset not reportable on a separate line.
A230HNOTE A230H Explanatory Notes Free Text
A230T Total Other Assets Sum of lines A230A through A230H (exclude A230C, A230D, A230F)
A230I Other Assets Other as Percentage of Total Assets CALCULATED: A230H divided by A240. If this amount is greater than 5 percent, you 
must list an explanation in item A230J.
A230J Explanation of Amounts in 'Other Assets Other' If percentage in A230I is greater than or equal to 5%, Explanation of Amounts In 
“Other Assets – Other” is required.
SCHEDULE B: LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
Current Liabilities
B009 Outstanding Balance on Warehouse Lines of 
Credit
Outstanding balance of warehouse lines of credit used to fund mortgages.
B010 Outstanding Balance on Debt Facilities Outstanding balance of lines of credit, including lines of credit to finance repurchased 
loans and mortgage servicing rights (MSR). Also include on-balance sheet debt 
relating to reverse repurchase facilities for which the institution serves as the 
“seller/borrower” and asset backed commercial paper facilities. Include outstanding 
balances on debt facilities provided by both affiliates and non-affiliates.
B070 Commercial Paper Unsecured, short-term debt instrument issued by corporation, typically for the 
financing of accounts receivable, inventories and meeting short-term liabilities.
Data Format:
$ - Dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals.  
% - Number to the nearest hundredth (two-decimal figure)
Data Format:
$ – US Dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals.  
Page 26 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
B080 Other Short-Term Payables to Related Parties Short-term payables due to related parties that are not included above, which are 
maturing within the coming year. Includes accrued interest payable to related parties 
and similar items (except for accrued payroll, included in Accrued Expenses in line 
item B100 below).
B090 Other Short-Term Notes Payable to Unrelated 
Parties 
Short-term notes payable due to unrelated parties that are not included above, which 
are maturing within the coming year.
B100 Accrued Expenses Total accrued liabilities such as rent, utilities, and sales taxes to unrelated parties. 
Include all accrued payroll.
B120 Other Current Liabilities Total of all other short-term liabilities such as unearned revenues, deferred non-loan 
fees, and undisbursed principal on mortgages. This amount includes current tax 
liabilities.
B217 Total Current Liabilities CALCULATED: B009 + B010 + B070 + B080 + B090 + B100 + B120
Long-Term Liabilities
B020 Collateralized Mortgage Debt Relating to 
Financings 
Collateralized mortgage debt associated with securitizations accounted for as 
financings rather than sales under FAS 140 and subsequent accounting 
pronouncements. Note that the mortgage loans associated with these securitizations 
are reported on Schedule A-060.
B030 Collateralized Mortgage Debt Other Collateralized mortgage debt not reported separately on this form.
B040 Trust Preferred Securities Trust Preferred Securities. Securities created by forming a trust and issuing debt to 
the new trust. The trust issues trust preferred securities, which are counted towards 
regulatory capital.
B050 Deposits Deposits. Demand accounts, money market accounts and certificate of deposit 
balances.
B060 Advances from Federal Home Loan Banks Advances from Federal Home Loan Banks.
B110 Estimated Future Loss Liability (Recourse) Total allowance for losses on off-balance sheet items, such as recourse obligations 
and guarantees and litigation.
B130 Other Long-Term Liabilities to Related Parties Total long-term liabilities to related parties.
B140 Other Long-Term Liabilities to Unrelated Parties All other long-term liabilities not included above.
B150 Servicing Liabilities Any servicing liability that is required to be recognized pursuant to the guidance of 
FAS 125, FAS 140, FAS 156 and other pronouncements.
B160 Guaranty Liabilities under FIN 45 The carrying amount of any guaranty liabilities required under FIN 45.
B170 Other Financial Instrument Liabilities, at Fair 
Value 
Fair value of other financial instruments where the fair value option was elected under 
FAS 159, and where the fair value is a liability. This should not include “loans held for 
sale, at fair value” or “loans held for investment, at fair value” because they are 
reported separately in item A062T and A066T, respectively.
B180 Derivative Liabilities This is a total from the Derivatives schedule—Schedule A220. It includes any 
derivative investments/instruments that are required to be carried on the balance 
sheet as derivative liabilities according to the provisions of FAS 133 and subsequent 
amendments.
B190 Taxes Payable Current income taxes payable. Taxes due and payable based on taxable income.
B200 Deferred Tax Liability Deferred income taxes payable. A liability that results from income that has already 
been earned for accounting purposes but not for tax purposes.
B210 Repurchase Reserves Liabilities for standard representations and warranties, early payment default, first 
payment default, premium recapture and other repurchase obligations. This must 
equal line O350 on Schedule O.
B219 Total Long-Term Liabilities CALCULATED: B020 + B030 + B040 + B050 + B060 + B110 + B130 + B140 + B150 
+ B160 + B170 + B180 + B190 + B200 + B210
B220 Total Liabilities CALCULATED: B217 + B219
Equity 
For Corporations: 
B250 Preferred Stock, Issued and Outstanding Total par value of all preferred stock issued and outstanding, redeemable and non
redeemable, including preferred treasury stock that has not been retired.
B260 Common Stock, Issued and Outstanding Total par value of all common stock issued and outstanding. Includes stock set aside 
for distribution in Employee Stock Ownership Plans (ESOPs).
B270 Additional Paid-In Capital Total paid-in capital in excess of par from preferred and common stock and capital 
contributions.
B280 Retained Earnings Total retained earnings less the par value of stock set aside for distribution in ESOPs.
B290 Treasury Stock Non-preferred treasury stock that has not been retired.
B300 Other Comprehensive Income (OCI) Changes in equity due to non-owner sources such as after-tax unrealized gains or 
losses on securities, foreign currency translations, etc., per FAS 130.
Page 27 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
B310 Noncontrolling Interest This line should include amounts relating to noncontrolling interests in consolidated 
subsidiaries pursuant to FAS 160, which was issued in December, 2007 and is 
applicable for fiscal years beginning after 12/15/08.
B240 Subordinated Debt Debt that is subordinated to all other forms of debt.
B319 Total Corporate Equity CALCULATED: B250 + B260 + B270 + B280 + B290 + B300 + B310 + B240
For Partnerships and Sole Proprietorships: 
B320 General Partners' Capital For organizations organized as partnerships or sole proprietorships, total capital of 
general partners or sole proprietor.
For Partnerships: 
B330 Limited Partners' Capital For organizations organized as partnerships, total capital of limited partners.
B340 Members' Capital Total capital of companies that are not incorporated and do not have partners.
B349 Total Limited Partnership and Members Capital CALCULATED: B330 + B340
For All Companies: 
B350 Total Equity CALCULATED: B319 + B320 + B349
B360 Total Liabilities and Equity CALCULATED: The sum of B220 and B350.
SCHEDULE B-350R: EQUITY ROLLFORWARD
B350A Balance at Beginning of Period Total equity at beginning of this quarter. This balance should be equal to total equity 
at the end of the last reporting period (Line item B350 from prior reporting period).
B350B Net Income / (Loss) Must be equal to line item D600.
B350C Issuance of New Stock or Conversions of 
Preferred to Common 
The proceeds from the issuance of common and preferred stock issued during the 
period.
B350D Stock Repurchases The cost of non-preferred treasury stock that was repurchased during the period.
B350E Other Capital Contributions Any contributions of capital received during the period (received from parent, 
stockholders, partners, etc.).
B350F OCI: Unrealized Gains/(Losses) from Assets 
Available-for-Sale
Any unrealized gain or loss recorded during the quarter for assets categorized as 
available for sale under the provisions of FAS 115 and FAS 134. This line item is 
related to the provisions of FAS 130 (other comprehensive income (OCI)).
B350G OCI: Unrealized Gains/(Losses) from Derivatives 
Designated as Cash Flow Hedges 
Unrealized Gains (Losses) from derivatives designated as cash flow hedges recorded 
to other comprehensive income (OCI) in accordance with FAS 133 and subsequent 
amendments.
B350H OCI: Other Changes in OCI All other changes in other comprehensive income (OCI). For example, certain 
adjustments relating to pension plans should be reported here.
B350I Cumulative Effect from Adoption of FAS 156 The after-tax value of the cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings resulting 
from the FAS 156 election to begin recording an existing class of separately 
recognized MSRs at fair value. This can only be done at the beginning of a fiscal 
year.
B350J Cumulative Effect from Adoption of FAS 159 The after-tax value of the cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings resulting 
from the FAS 159 election to begin recording an existing class of financial instruments 
at fair value. This can only be done at the beginning of a fiscal year.
B350K Cumulative Effect Adjustments to Retained 
Earnings Other 
Other cumulative effect adjustments to retained earnings not reported on a separate 
line on this form.
B350L Dividends/Distributions Any dividends paid to stockholders/owners or distributions made to partners during 
the period. This amount must be less than or equal to zero.
B350M Changes in the carrying amount of Noncontrolling 
Interest 
This line should include changes in equity relating to noncontrolling interests pursuant 
to FAS 160, which was issued in December 2007 and is applicable for fiscal years 
beginning after 12/15/08.
B350N Equity Adjustments Changes/adjustments not reported on other lines.
B350NNOTE B350N Explanatory Notes Free Text
B350T Balance at End of Period CALCULATED: The sum of B350A to B350N.
SCHEDULE C: INCOME
Interest Income 
Data Format:
$ – Dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals.  
Data Format:
$ – US Dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals.  
Page 28 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
C010 Residential Loans Held For Sale Total interest earned on warehousing for all 1- to 4-unit residential mortgage loans 
and multifamily/commercial mortgage loans. Include interest income for warehouse 
lines of credit, collateralized repurchase lines of credit, asset backed commercial 
paper, and other debt facilities used to finance mortgage originations. Report 
amounts in appropriate columns.
C020 Loans Held for Investment Total interest income on loans held for investment.
C030 Securities Held to Maturity Total interest income from securities held to maturity.
C040 Securities Available for Sale Total interest income from securities available for sale (AFS). Interest income from 
Multifamily and Commercial AFS securities should be recorded on the 
Multifamily/Commercial column. Interest income from all other AFS securities should 
be reported in the Residential Portfolio Management and All Other column.
C050 Trading Securities Total interest income from trading securities. Interest income from Multifamily and 
Commercial trading securities should be recorded on the Multifamily/Commercial 
column. Interest income from all other Trading securities should be reported in the 
Residential Portfolio Management and All Other column.
C060 Other Interest Income Total other interest income. Include interest income not reported on one of the line 
items above.
C070 Recognition of Yield Adjustment Amortization of amounts deferred under FAS 91.
C080 Servicing-Related/Escrow Interest income generated from servicing related P&I and T&I custodial accounts.
C090 Total Interest Income CALCULATED: The sum of C010 to C080 for the relevant Column.
NON-INTEREST INCOME 
Origination Related Non-Interest Income 
C200 Discounts on FV of LHS When originated loans are accounted for under the fair value option of FAS 159, 
discounts received can be recorded as income and premiums paid can be recorded 
as expense. This line captures the income effect of such discounts and premiums. 
Other fees collected, such as origination fees, can also be recorded as income, but 
those are reported on separate lines on this form.  LHS refers to "Loans Held for 
Sale"
C210 Origination Fees Origination fee income earned from retail and direct marketing loan production.
C220 Fees Received from Correspondents and Brokers Fee income earned on loans acquired from correspondents and brokers.
C230 Broker Fees Received on Loans Brokered Out Fees received for loans that your institution brokers out. The principal balance and 
loan count associated with these fees should (a) not be included in origination volume 
and (b) be reported in line item I420 on schedule I.
C240 Other Origination Related Income Other loan origination income not included above, such as fees collected from 
borrowers for credit reports, appraisals or special requirements such as photographs. 
Offsetting expenses should be reported in line item D280.
C250 Contra: Amounts Reclassified Fee income recorded on lines C210, C220, C230 or C240 that are reclassified as gain 
on sale or deferred in accordance with FAS 91.
C260 Total Origination Related Non-Interest Income CALCULATED: The sum of C200 to C250 for the relevant column.
Secondary Marketing Gains/(Losses) On Sale 
C300 Gain on Loans/MBS Sold with Servicing Retained The difference between the sales price and the carrying value of sales of mortgage
backed securities classified as trading securities sold with servicing retained and 
mortgages sold with servicing retained. Only the portion attributable to the mortgage 
loans or mortgage-backed securities should be included in this line item. Any gain or 
loss allocated to the capitalization of servicing rights should be captured in line item 
C310. Origination fees that otherwise would be included here per FAS 91 should be 
reported in line C210 for retail and direct marketing production or C220 for 
broker/correspondent production. Direct loan origination costs that otherwise would be 
included here per FAS 91 should be reported in the applicable expense line items. 
Exclude any premium to buy options ("option premium") because option premiums 
are reported on line C380.
C310 Capitalized Servicing On Loans/MBS Sold with 
Servicing Retained 
The portion of any gain or loss recognized from the sale of loans and MBS with 
servicing retained that is allocated to the capitalization of servicing rights.
Page 29 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
C320 Gain on Loans/MBS Sold with Servicing Released The difference between the sales price and the carrying value of mortgages (net of 
any discounts or premiums that were not immediately recognized as income, if 
applicable) sold or securitized with servicing released. Only the portion attributable to 
the mortgage loans sold should be included in this line item. Servicing values should 
be excluded because they are reported separately on this form. Any gain or loss 
related to the servicing released premiums received should be captured in line item 
C330. Origination and other fees should not be included here because they should be 
reported in line C210 for retail production or C220 for broker/correspondent 
production. Direct loan origination costs should also be excluded here because they 
are reported in the applicable expense line items. Option premiums and other hedge 
costs should also be excluded because they are reported separately on line C380.
C330 Servicing Released Premiums on Loans/MBS 
Sold
The portion of any gain or loss recognized from the sale of loans that is related to the 
servicing released premium received.
C340 Fees Paid to Brokers Include yield spread premium and other fees paid to brokers if not reported separately 
on this form. Companies that account for such fees as a direct adjustment to the gain 
on sale will include the amounts paid here. Other companies may account for such 
fees as an adjustment to the basis in the loan (thereby including the cost in the 
gain/loss on sale line) and not report the cost on this line. The amount entered must 
be equal to or less than zero.
C350 Direct Fees Reclassified as Gain on Sale Fee income that is reclassified as gain on sale in accordance with FAS 91.
C360 Direct Expenses Reclassified as Gain on Sale Direct expenses that are reclassified as gain on sale in accordance with FAS 91.
C370 Recognition of Retained Interests The initial basis of securities and other interests (such as residuals) created be 
included here because they are reported separately. upon securitization and retained 
by the transferor. This is based on a relative fair value allocation under FAS 140 or 
fair values if the fair value option was elected under FAS 159. Mortgage servicing 
rights should not
C380 Pair-Off Expenses and Other Hedge Costs Hedge costs, including pair-off gains and losses and option premiums.
C390 Provision for Repurchase Reserve The provision for reserves for standard representations and warranties, early 
payment default, first payment default, premium recapture and other repurchase 
obligations. This must equal line O320 on Schedule O.
C400 LOCOM Adjustments on Loans Held for Sale Income statement impact of lower of cost or market (LOCOM) adjustments recorded 
for certain loans held for sale. This is not applicable for loans held for sale at fair 
value.
C410 Income Relating to Interest Rate Lock 
Commitments (IRLCs) 
Interest rate lock commitments (IRLC) relating to loans held for sale are derivatives in 
accordance with FAS 133 and subsequent amendments. Any gain or loss recognized 
at the inception of the IRLC (see guidance the SEC’s Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) 
109) or afterwards should be included here. Note that gains/losses on derivatives 
related to hedges of MSRs are reported in the “Servicing-Related Non-Interest” 
section and gains/losses on derivatives related to Other Financial Instruments are 
reported in the Other Non-Interest” section.
C420 Gains on Derivatives Hedging Interest Rate Locks 
and Loans HFS
Gains or losses incurred on the valuation of derivative instruments recognized 
according to the provisions of FAS 133 and subsequent amendments. This should 
include only gains/losses relating to derivatives used to hedge inventory/pipeline 
loans (regardless of whether the hedges qualified for hedge accounting treatment).
C430 Gain on Changes in Fair Value of Loans HFS Gains and losses recognized due to changes in the fair value of loans held for sale 
that are carried at fair value (i.e., where the fair value option was elected under FAS 
159).
C440 Other Secondary Market Gains Other gains or losses upon the sale or securitization of loans.
C450 Net Secondary Marketing Income CALCULATED: The sum of C300 to C440 for the relevant column.
Servicing-Related Non-Interest Income 
C500 Servicing Fees on First Mortgages Servicing fees earned on all 1-to-4 unit first mortgage loans, commercial mortgage 
loans, and multifamily mortgage loans before deducting amortization of capitalized 
(PMSR and OMSR) servicing. Does NOT include subservicing fees earned. Net out 
guarantee fees from this item.
C510 Servicing Fees on Other Mortgages Servicing fees earned on second mortgages, reverse mortgages, and all loans not 
included in line item C500, before deducting amortization of capitalized servicing.
C520 Subservicing Fees (include Intercompany) Servicing fees earned on loans for which your institution does not own the servicing 
rights. Include subservicing fees on loans subserviced for affiliates.
Page 30 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
C530 Subservicing Fees (Intracompany Only) If you have a formal arrangement within your institution to recognize income in the 
servicing department and expense in: (a) the portfolio management department, 
and/or (b) the origination or secondary marketing departments, enter intracompany 
subservicing fees as a positive number in the “Servicing” column and a negative 
number in the other columns as negative numbers. The total amount on this line must 
be zero.
C540 Late Fees and Other Ancillary Fees Loan administration income not included above, such as late charge penalties and 
fees collected from borrowers for loan processing expenses.
C550 Amortization of MSRs The dollar amount of MSRs that were amortized during the quarter. Enter as a 
negative number.
C560 Other Than Temporary Impairment of MSRs The dollar amount of Amortized MSRs that were written off during the period as a 
result of other than temporary impairment. Enter as a negative number.
C570 Changes in MSR Valuation Allowance Changes in the Amortized MSR valuation allowance during the period. This can be a 
gain or a loss. This is not applicable for Fair Value MSRs.
C580 Changes in MSR Value Due to Realized Cash 
Flows
Change in value of Fair Value MSRs due to realization of cash flows, per FAS 156.
C590 Changes in MSR Value Due to Market/Model 
Changes
Change in value of Fair Value MSRs due to market and model changes, per FAS 156.
C600 Gains(Losses) on Derivatives Used to Hedge 
MSRs
All gains or losses on derivative instruments related to hedging MSRs and recognized 
according to the provisions of FAS 133 and subsequent amendments. Note that 
gains/losses on derivatives related to hedges of IRLCs and loans held for sale are 
reported in the “Secondary Marketing Gain (Loss) On Sale” section and gains/losses 
on derivatives related to Other Financial Instruments are reported in the “Other Non
Interest Income” section.
C610 Other Changes in MSR Value Other changes in Fair Value MSRs not reported on a separate line.
C620 Net Gain on Bulk Sale of MSRs Net gain (loss) on sale of servicing rights sold in bulk. Servicing released premiums 
received are to be reported on line item C330.
C630 Net Gain on Sale of REO Net gain (loss) on the sale of real estate owned.
C640 Other Servicing-Related Income Other servicing related income not reported elsewhere on this form.
C650 Total Servicing-Related Non-Interest Income CALCULATED: The sum of C500 to C640 for the relevant column.
Other Non-Interest Income 
C720 Gain from Sale of Securities Net realized and unrealized gain (loss) on sale of debt and equity securities, including 
held-to-maturity, available-for-sale, and trading securities. Exclude the gain on 
securities sold in conjunction with mortgage origination and secondary marketing 
activities because those are reported on lines C300 and C320. The net unrealized 
gain/(loss) on securities classified as trading securities is reported in line item C730. 
The net unrealized gain (loss) on those classified as available-for-sale securities is 
reported in line item B350F.
C730 Unrealized Gain on Trading Securities Unrealized gains and losses recognized due to changes in the fair value of securities 
designated as Trading Securities. Trading Securities are carried at fair value.
C740 Gain on Other Derivatives/Financial Instruments Include all gains or losses incurred on the valuation of any derivative instruments 
recognized according to the provisions of FAS 133 and subsequent amendments. 
This should include derivative gains/losses on free standing derivatives and any other 
derivatives not reported elsewhere on this form. Note that gains/losses on derivatives 
related to hedges of IRLCs and loans held for sale are reported in the “Secondary 
Marketing Gain(Loss) On Sale” section and gains/losses on derivatives related to 
hedges of MSRs are reported in the “Servicing-Related Non-Interest” section. In 
addition, include gains and losses relating to changes in the fair value of financial 
instruments pursuant to FAS 159 which are not reported elsewhere on this form.
C750 Gain on FV of Loans HFI Gains and losses recognized due to changes in the fair value of loans held for 
investment that are carried at fair value (i.e., where the fair value option was elected 
under FAS 159).
C760 Income from JV/Partnerships/Other Entities Income from investments in unconsolidated joint ventures, partnerships, and other 
entities that are accounted for using the equity method of accounting (i.e., those 
operations that are not consolidated) and for which the investment in the subsidiary is 
included on line A280. Anything reported here should be excluded from all other 
income on this form.
C770 Other Non-Interest Income Any other non-interest income not reported above.
C780 Total Other Non-Interest Income CALCULATED: The sum of C720 to C770 for the relevant column.
Page 31 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
C800 Total Gross Income CALCULATED: The sum of C090,  C260, C450, C650, and C780 for the relevant 
column.
Interest Expense 
C100 Warehousing Interest Expense Total interest expense on warehouse lines or other debt associated with 1-to 4- unit 
residential mortgage loans and multifamily/commercial mortgage loans. Include 
interest expense for warehouse lines of credit, collateralized repurchase lines of 
credit, asset-backed commercial paper, and other debt facilities used to finance 
mortgage originations Report amounts in appropriate columns. Enter as a positive 
number.
C110 Income Property Interest Expense Total interest expense on debt associated with income property loans. Enter as a 
positive number.
C120 Interest Expense on MBS Pools/Prepayment 
Interest Shortfall 
The amount of uncollected interest that is required to be passed on to the security 
holder when a loan is not paid off on the first day of the month; the excess of interest 
passed-through over the amount reimbursed. Should also include interest losses 
absorbed on GNMA pools under the Service members Civil Relief Act of 2003. Enter 
as a positive number.
C130 Interest Expense on Residential MSR Asset Interest expense on debt used to finance residential MSR assets. Enter as a positive 
number.
C140 Interest Expense Debt Issuance Total interest expense relating to debt issuances such as bonds and subordinated 
debt. Enter as a positive number.
C150 Other Interest Expense Total interest expense not reported elsewhere, e.g., credit card debt, imputed interest 
relating to leases, multifamily/commercial MSR interest expense, etc. Enter as a 
positive number.
C160 Total Interest Expense CALCULATED: The sum of C100 to C150 for the relevant column.
SCHEDULE CF: SELECTED CASH FLOW DATA
CF010 Net Cash (Used)/Provided by Operating Activities Total from the applicable section from the statement of cash flows prepared in 
accordance with generally accepted accounting principals.
CF020 Cash Flows from Investing Activities Total from the applicable section from the statement of cash flows prepared in 
accordance with generally accepted accounting principals.
CF030 Cash Flows from Financing Activities Total from the applicable section from the statement of cash flows prepared in 
accordance with generally accepted accounting principals.
CF040 Total Increase/(Decrease) in Cash CALCULATED: Total increase/(decrease) in cash. The sum of CF010, CF020 and 
CF030.
Schedule D: Non-Interest Expense
Non-Corporate Personnel Compensation
Origination, Secondary Marketing, Warehousing Personnel 
D010 Loan Production Officers (Sales Employees) Compensation of loan production officers involved in retail residential (1-to 4- unit) 
originations and sales account executives or personnel involved in broker/wholesale 
residential originations.
D020 Loan Origination (Fulfillment/Non-Sales) Compensation of loan origination employees which includes loan processors, 
underwriters and closers, and all other employees (including clerical) involved in retail 
residential (1-to 4-unit) loan origination. Does NOT include loan production/sales 
officers (see line item D010) or warehousing and marketing employees (see line item 
D030).
D030 Warehousing/Secondary Marketing Compensation of residential (1-to 4-unit) employees (including clerical) whose 
principal function is warehousing, secondary marketing, and selling loans.
D040 Post-Close and Other Production Support Compensation of other residential (1-to 4-unit) personnel or production support staff 
involved in the originations process, including post-close, shipping and delivery, 
quality control, overall marketing, technology support, and interim servicing.
D050 Origination-Related Management and Directors Compensation of originations-related managers, directors, executives, and related 
personnel. These include management and administrative staff (e.g., administrative 
assistants) who oversee the entire Originations function and who are not line 
management. Employees who manage more than one function, but not the entire 
operation, should be allocated to the appropriate function. Include in this line item 
commercial, multifamily, portfolio investment, and other management personnel not 
included above.
Data Format:
$ – US Dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals.  
Data Format:
$ – US Dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals.  
Page 32 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
D060 Other Origination-Related Compensation of any other personnel, such as commercial, multifamily, portfolio 
investment, and other personnel not included above, who are part of the Originations 
function.
D070 Total Origination Compensation CALCULATED: The sum of D010 to D060 for the relevant column.
Servicing Personnel 
D080 Servicing-Related Management and Directors Compensation of servicing-related managers, directors, executives, and related 
personnel. These include management and administrative staff (e.g., administrative 
assistants) who oversee the entire Servicing function and who are not line 
management. Employees who manage more than one function, but not the entire 
operation, should be allocated to the appropriate function.
D090 Other Servicing-Related Personnel Compensation of all other employees, including REO personnel, directly involved in 
the administration and servicing of residential (1-to 4-unit) loans, and commercial and 
multifamily loans Excludes employees in acquisitions, originations, loan set-up, 
personal loans, or commercial loans areas. Management and corporate support 
personnel should be reported in item D400 below.
D100 Total Servicing Compensation CALCULATED: The sum of D080 and D090 for the relevant column.
Other Personnel 
D110 Other Personnel Compensation of all other employees in the management of loans in the institution’s 
investment portfolio. Report these in the appropriate columns. Include related 
management and directors and support personnel for those loans. Do NOT include 
corporate or parent allocations; these should be reported only in item D400.
D120 Contra: Direct Personnel Expenses 
Reclassified/Deferred
Direct personnel expenses that are reclassified as gain on sale or deferred in 
accordance with FAS 91. This excludes any direct operating expenses reported on a 
separate line of this form. This amount must be less than or equal to zero.
D129 Total Other Personnel Compensation CALCULATED: The sum of D110 and D120
D130 Total Non-Corporate Personnel Compensation CALCULATED: The sum of D070 and D110.
Other Personnel Expenses 
D150 Employee Benefits (including Education and 
Training) 
Total employee benefits, including education and training. Includes profit-sharing plan 
contributions, pension program, group health and life insurance, and payroll taxes.
D160 Other Personnel Expenses All other personnel expenses.
D170 Total Other Personnel Expenses CALCULATED: The sum of D150 and D160 for the relevant column.
D180 Total Personnel Expenses CALCULATED: The sum of D130 and D170 for the relevant column.
Other Non-Interest Expenses
D200 Occupancy and Equipment Total occupancy and equipment expenses, such as rent, utilities and hazard 
insurance, fax machines, telephone, furniture, and fixtures, including depreciation.
D210 Technology-Related Expenses All non-personnel expenses associated with technology hardware and software. 
Include costs of loan origination systems (LOS), servicing systems, and technology
related service bureau fees. Do NOT include allocated corporate administration 
technology charges for network administration, basic software, etc. as these are 
reported in item D410.
D220 Outsourcing Fees Expenses related to outsourcing services, i.e., those performed by a third party. 
Examples of such expenses include those from an outside company providing 
production fulfillment processing services, an outsourced call center, and tax & 
escrow services. Exclude technology-specific charges, which are reported in item 
D210 above, and business-specific per transaction fees such as those associated 
with Automated Underwriting Systems, credit bureau requests, etc. Also exclude 
subservicing fees paid, as these are reported in line item D240 below.
D230 Professional Fees Professional fees for lawyers, accountants, consulting and other advisory services. 
Audit and tax related fees should be included here.
D240 Subservicing Fees (Including Intercompany) Servicing fees paid to a subservicer, including those paid to an affiliate for servicing 
loans for which you own the servicing rights. Note that intracompany subservicing 
fees paid should be reported on line C530.
D250 Unreimbursed Servicing Expenses for 
Foreclosure/REO 
Unreimbursable expenses (not recoverable) incurred during the foreclosure process 
or in connection with holding REO (such as maintenance fees, taxes, insurance, etc.) 
that were not reported in a provision for loss account.
D260 Change in REO Valuation Allowance Changes in the REO valuation allowance during the period. This must equal line 
O120 on Schedule O.
Page 33 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
D270 Provision For Other Losses The current period provision for other losses. This is the income statement impact of 
increasing the reserve. If completing the E-FC, this must equal line O220 on Schedule 
O.
D280 All Other Non-Interest Expenses Total non-interest expenses not included above and not included below in item 
D540—Nonrecurring Items. Note that guarantee fees should be netted out on line 
item C500. Brokered loan fees paid should be reported on line C340.
D290 Contra: Direct Operating Expenses Reclassified Direct operating expenses that are reclassified as gain on sale or deferred in
accordance with FAS 91. This excludes any personnel related expenses
reported on a separate line of this form. This amount must be less than or
equal to zero.
C700 Provision for Credit Losses on Loans Held For 
Investment 
The current period provision for credit losses on loans held for investment. This is the 
income statement impact of increasing the Credit Loss Reserve for Loans Held For 
Investment. This must equal line O020 on Schedule O.  This should be reflected as 
negative.
C710 Permanent Impairment (non-MSR) and Other 
Credit Related Losses
This line should include Other Than Temporary Impairment (OTTI) charges, which 
are permanent write-downs of assets (as opposed to accounting for using reserve 
accounts). This line should also include other credit-related losses not reported 
elsewhere on this form. Do not include MSR-related impairments accounted for 
elsewhere. Enter as a negative number.
D300 Total - Other Non-Interest Expenses CALCULATED
Corporate Administration/Overhead Allocations 
D400 Corporate Management/Support/Other Personnel Corporate or parent company charges for compensation, benefits, and other 
personnel expenses for corporate management and support staff.
D410 Corporate Technology Charges Corporate or parent company charges for all non-personnel expenses associated with 
technology hardware and software, including related corporate support and help desk.
D420 Goodwill Impairment Goodwill impairment. Impairment recognized in accordance with FAS 142.
D430 Other Corporate Expenses (not Included Above) Any other Corporate or parent company charges or expenses not included in the 
above corporate allocation items. This might include the income statement impact 
relating to the settlement of litigation or other unusual items.
D440 Total Corporate Administration/Allocation CALCULATED: The sum of D400 to D430.
D310 Total Gross Expenses Must equal the sum of C160, D180, D300, and D440
D510 Pre-Tax Net Operating Income Must equal C800 - D310
Income Taxes, Non-recurring Items, and Minority Interest 
D520 Income Taxes Income tax expense (benefit) on income.
D530 Net Income before Extraordinary Items and 
Noncontrolling Interest 
CALCULATED: Line item D510 minus line item D520.
D540 Extraordinary Items After-tax gain (loss) on nonrecurring items such as extraordinary items, discontinued 
operations, and cumulative effect of changes in accounting principles.
D550 Net Income before Noncontrolling Interest  CALCULATED: The sum of D530 and D540.
D560 Noncontrolling Interest After tax income (loss) attributed to minority interests. Note that FAS 160, which is 
required for fiscal years beginning after 12/15/08, will change the terminology from 
“minority interest” to “noncontrolling interest”.
D600 Net Income CALCULATED: Line item D550 plus line item D560.
SCHEDULE O - RESERVES AND VALUATION ALLOWANCE ROLLFORWARDS
Rollforward of Credit Loss Reserves on Loans Held for Investment
O010 Beginning Balance Balance of the credit loss reserve at the beginning of the period.
O020 Provision for Credit Losses on Loans Held for 
Investment
The current period provision for credit losses on loans held for investment. This is the 
income statement impact of increasing the reserve.
O030 Charge-offs, Net of Recoveries Charge off against the reserve, net of any recoveries during the period.
O040 Adjustments upon Adoption of FAS 159 Any impact on the credit loss reserve due to the FAS 159 election to begin recording 
an existing class of loans held for investment at fair value.
O050 Other Changes Other changes not reported separately on this form.
O060 Ending Balance Balance of the credit loss reserve at the end of the period.
Rollforward of Valuation Allowance on REO
Data Format:
$ – Dollar amount to the nearest dollar. Do not enter $, commas or decimals.  
# - Positive whole number
Page 34 of 35
Item # Name Definitions and Instructions
O110 Beginning REO Valuation Allowance Balance of the REO valuation allowance at the beginning of the period.
O120 Changes in REO Valuation Allowance Changes in the REO valuation allowance during the period.
O130 Ending REO Valuation Allowance Balance of the REO valuation allowance at the end of the period.
Rollforward of Reserve for Other Losses
O210 Beginning Reserve for Other Losses Balance of the reserve for other losses (i.e., loss reserves not included elsewhere on 
this form) at the beginning of the period.
O220 Provision For Other Losses The current period provision for other losses. This is the income statement impact of 
increasing the reserve for other losses.
O230 Charge-Offs, Net of Recoveries Charge off against the reserve for other losses, net of any recoveries during the 
period.
O240 Other Changes Other changes to the reserve for other losses not reported separately on this form.
O250 Ending Reserve for Other Losses Balance of the reserve for other losses at the end of the period.
Rollforward of Repurchase Reserves
O310 Beginning Repurchase Reserve Balance of the repurchase reserve at the beginning of the period. This should include 
reserves for standard representations and warranties, early payment default, first 
payment default, premium recapture and other repurchase obligations.
O320 Provision for Repurchases (EPD, FPD, etc.) The provision for reserves for standard representations and warranties, early 
payment default, first payment default, premium recapture and other repurchase 
obligations.
O330 Charge-Offs, Net of Recoveries Charge off against the repurchase reserve, net of any recoveries during the period.
O340 Other Changes Other changes to the repurchase reserve not reported separately on this form.
O350 Ending Repurchase Reserve Balance of the repurchase reserve at the end of the period.
O360 MEMO: UPB of Loans Repurchased or 
Indemnified During the Quarter
Unpaid principal balance of loans repurchased or indemnified during the quarter.
O370 MEMO: Number of Loans Repurchased or 
Indemnified During the Quarter
Number of loans repurchased or indemnified during the quarter.
EXPLANATORY NOTES-FREE TEXT
FCNOTE Provide any necessary explanations requiring clarification for the Financial Condition 
component in this field. This field is a permanent part of your Mortgage Call Report 
filing. 
Page 35 of 35